                       Solomon

     An abridgment of the proverbs attributed to
   Solomon. Verse references such as ³·⁹ indi-
      cate the original source of the text, but
            donʼt imply a full quotation.


# My Son

³·¹My son, donʼt forget my teaching, but let your
heart keep my commandments, ²for they will bring you
many days, years of life, and peace.

³·³Donʼt let kindness and truth leave you. Tie them a-
round your neck. Write them on the tablet of your
heart. ⁴Then you will find favor and high regard in
the sight of God and man.

³·⁵Trust in Gᴏᴅ with all your heart, and donʼt lean
on your own understanding. ⁶In all your ways acknowl-
edge him, and he will make your paths straight.
⁷Donʼt be wise in your own eyes. Fear Gᴏᴅ, and turn a-
way from evil. ⁸It will be healing to your body, and
refreshment to your bones.

³·⁹Honor Gᴏᴅ with your wealth, and with the first-
fruits of all your produce, ¹⁰then your barns will be
filled with plenty, and your vats will overflow with
new wine.

³·¹¹My son, donʼt reject the discipline of Gᴏᴅ or
loathe his reproof; ¹²for Gᴏᴅ reproves the one he
loves, just as a father reproves the son in whom he
delights.

³·¹³Happy is the man who finds wisdom, and the man
who gains understanding. ¹⁴For she is more profita-
ble than silver, and her gain is better than fine
gold. ¹⁵She is more precious than jewels, and noth-
ing you desire compares with her. ¹⁶Long life is in
her right hand. In her left hand are riches and hon-
or. ¹⁷Her ways are pleasant, and all her paths are
peaceful. ¹⁸She is a tree of life to those who take
hold of her. Those who hold her fast are happy.

³·¹⁹Gᴏᴅ founded the earth by wisdom. He established
the heavens by understanding. ²⁰By his knowledge the
depths broke open, and the clouds drip with dew.

³·²¹My son, donʼt lose sight of them. Keep sound wis-
dom and discretion. ²²They will be life for your
soul, and adornment for your neck. ²³Then you will
walk on your way securely, and your foot wonʼt stum-
ble. ²⁴When you lie down, you wonʼt be afraid. When
you lie down, your sleep will be sweet.

³·²⁵Donʼt fear sudden disaster or the ruin of the
wicked when it comes, ²⁶for Gᴏᴅ will be your confi-
dence, and will keep your foot from being caught.

³·²⁷Donʼt withhold good from those who deserve it,
when it is in your power to do it. ²⁸Donʼt say to
your neighbor, “Go, and come back. Iʼll give it to-
morrow,” when you have it with you. ²⁹Donʼt plan evil
against your neighbor, who lives trustingly beside
you.

³·³⁰Donʼt contend with a man without cause, when he
has done you no harm. ³¹Donʼt envy a violent man or
choose any of his ways, ³²for the devious are an a-
bomination to Gᴏᴅ, but he is a friend to the up-
right.

³·³³The curse of Gᴏᴅ is on the house of the wicked,
but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous. ³⁴He
mocks the mockers, but shows favor to the humble.
³⁵The wise will inherit honor, but fools get shame.

—

⁴·¹Listen, sons, to a fatherʼs instruction, and pay
attention so that you may gain understanding. ²For I
give you sound instruction. Donʼt abandon my teach-
ing.

⁴·³When I was a son to my father, tender and the on-
ly son in my motherʼs sight, ⁴he taught me, and said
to me: “Let your heart hold on to my words. Keep my
commandments and live. ⁵Get wisdom. Get understand-
ing. Donʼt forget or turn away from the words of my
mouth. ⁶Donʼt forsake her, and she will guard you.
Love her, and she will watch over you. ⁷The begin-
ning of wisdom is this: Get wisdom, and whatever else
you get, get understanding. ⁸Prize her, and she will
exalt you. If you embrace her, she will honor you.
⁹She will place on your head a garland of grace. She
will present you with a crown of beauty.”

⁴·¹⁰Listen, my son, and accept my sayings, and the
years of your life will be many. ¹¹I have taught you
in the way of wisdom. I have led you in upright
paths. ¹²When you walk, your steps wonʼt be hindered.
When you run, you wonʼt stumble. ¹³Hold on to in-
struction. Donʼt let go. Guard her, for she is your
life.

⁴·¹⁴Donʼt enter the path of the wicked, and donʼt
walk in the way of evil men. ¹⁵Avoid it. Donʼt trav-
el on it. Turn away from it, and pass on. ¹⁶For they
cannot sleep unless they do evil. They are robbed of
sleep unless they make someone stumble. ¹⁷For they
eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of vi-
olence. ¹⁸But the path of the righteous is like the
light of dawn, which shines brighter and brighter un-
til midday. ¹⁹The way of the wicked is like dark-
ness. They donʼt know what makes them stumble.

⁴·²⁰My son, pay attention to my words. Listen care-
fully to my sayings. ²¹Donʼt lose sight of them. Keep
them within your heart. ²²For they are life to those
who find them, and health to their whole body.

⁴·²³Watch over your heart with all diligence, for the
springs of life flow from it. ²⁴Put away from you de-
ceitful speech, and put devious talk far from you.

⁴·²⁵Let your eyes look directly ahead and your gaze
straight in front of you. ²⁶Carefully consider the
path of your feet, then all your ways will be sure.
²⁷Donʼt turn to the right or to the left. Keep your
foot from evil.

—

⁵·¹My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen care-
fully to my understanding, ²that you may maintain dis-
cretion, and that your lips may guard knowledge.

⁵·³The lips of a forbidden woman drip honey, and her
speech is smoother than oil, ⁴but in the end sheʼs as
bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a double-edged
sword. ⁵Her feet go down to death. Her steps lead
straight to hell. ⁶She doesnʼt ponder the path of
life. Her ways are unstable, and she doesnʼt know it.

⁵·⁷Now then, my sons, listen to me, and donʼt depart
from the words of my mouth. ⁸Keep your way far from
her. Donʼt go near the door of her house ⁹lest you
give your vigor to others and your years to someone
cruel, ¹⁰lest strangers feast on your wealth, your
labors enrich the house of a foreigner, ¹¹and at the
end of your life you groan when your flesh and body
are consumed. ¹²You will say, “How I hated disci-
pline! How my heart despised reproof! ¹³I didnʼt o-
bey my teachers or listen to my instructors! ¹⁴I am
almost in utter ruin in the midst of the assembly and
congregation.”

⁵·¹⁵Drink water from your own cistern, and fresh wa-
ter from your own well. ¹⁶Should your springs be
scattered abroad, streams of water in the streets?
¹⁷Let them be yours alone, and not for strangers with
you. ¹⁸Let your fountain be blessed, and rejoice in
the wife of your youth, ¹⁹as a loving deer and a
graceful doe. Let her breasts satisfy you always, and
be exhilarated always with her love.

⁵·²⁰Why, my son, should you be exhilarated with a for-
bidden woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger?
²¹For a manʼs ways are before the eyes of Gᴏᴅ, and he
considers all his paths. ²²The iniquities of the wick-
ed entrap him. He is held in the cords of his sin.
²³He dies for lack of discipline, and because of his
great folly he will go astray.

—

⁶·¹My son, if you have put up security for your neigh-
bor or have given a pledge for a stranger, ²if you
have been snared or caught with the words of your
mouth, ³then do this, my son, and free yourself. You
have fallen into your neighborʼs hands. Go, humble
yourself, and plead with your neighbor. ⁴Give your
eyes no sleep and your eyelids no slumber. ⁵Save your-
self like a gazelle from the hunterʼs hand, and like
a bird from the fowlerʼs hand.

⁶·⁶Go to the ant, you idler. Observe its ways, and be
wise. ⁷Without chief, officer, or ruler, ⁸it prepares
its provisions in summer, and gathers its food dur-
ing harvest.

⁶·⁹How long will you lie down, you idler? When will
you get up from your sleep? ¹⁰A little sleep, a lit-
tle slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,
¹¹and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and
want like an armed man.

⁶·¹²A worthless person, a wicked man, goes around
speaking perversely. ¹⁴With perversity in his heart,
he devises evil continually, and sows discord.
¹⁵Therefore calamity will strike him suddenly. In-
stantly he will be broken beyond healing.

⁶·¹⁶Seven things are an abomination to Gᴏᴅ: ¹⁷haugh-
ty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent
blood, ¹⁸a heart that devises wicked plans, feet that
run swiftly to evil, ¹⁹a false witness who utters
lies, and one who sows discord among brothers.

⁶·²⁰My son, keep your fatherʼs command, and donʼt for-
sake your motherʼs teaching. ²¹Always bind them on
your heart. Tie them around your neck. ²²When you
walk, they will guide you. When you sleep, they will
watch over you. When you wake up, they will talk to
you. ²³For this command is a lamp, this teaching is a
light, and corrective discipline is the way to life,
²⁴keeping you from the evil woman, from the
flattering tongue of an adulteress.

⁶·²⁵Donʼt desire her beauty in your heart or let her
captivate you with her eyes. ²⁶For a prostituteʼs fee
is only a loaf of bread, but a married woman hunts
down a precious life. ²⁷Can a man embrace fire with-
out burning his clothes? ²⁸Or can he walk on hot
coals without scorching his feet? ²⁹So is he who goes
in to his neighborʼs wife. None who touches her will
go unpunished.

⁶·³⁰People donʼt despise a thief if he steals to sat-
isfy his hunger, ³¹but if caught, he must repay sev-
enfold. He will give everything in his house.

⁶·³²He who commits adultery lacks sense, and destroys
himself. ³³He will get wounds and dishonor, and his
disgrace wonʼt be erased. ³⁴For jealousy enrages a
husband, and he will show no mercy in the day of
vengeance. ³⁵He wonʼt accept compensation. He will
refuse, though you give many gifts.

# Relationships

⁷·¹⁰A woman met him, dressed as a prostitute, and cun-
ning of heart. ¹³She seizes him, kisses him, and bra-
zenly says to him, ¹⁴“I had to offer peace offerings.
Today Iʼve paid my vows. ¹⁶Iʼve spread my couch with
coverings, with colored linens from Egypt. ¹⁸Come,
letʼs drink our fill of love until morning. Letʼs de-
light ourselves with caresses.” ²¹She seduces him
with her persuasive speech. With her flattering lips
she lures him. ²²He follows her at once, like an ox
going to the slaughter, like a deer stepping into a
trap. ²⁵Donʼt let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Donʼt stray into her paths. ²⁶For she has cast down
many victims, and all her slain are numerous.

¹¹·²⁹He who troubles his own house will inherit the
wind.

¹²·⁴An excellent wife is her husbandʼs crown, but she
who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.

¹³·²⁰He who walks with wise men will become wise, but
the companion of fools will suffer harm.

¹³·²⁴He who spares the rod hates his son, but he who
loves him disciplines him diligently.

¹⁴·⁷Leave the presence of a fool, for you wonʼt find
knowledge in his speech.

¹⁴·²⁸A large population is a kingʼs glory, but with-
out people a prince is ruined.

¹⁵·¹⁷Better is a serving of vegetables where there is
love, than a fattened ox served with hatred.

¹⁶·⁷When a manʼs ways please Gᴏᴅ, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him.

¹⁷·⁶Grandchildren are the crown of old men, and
fathers are the glory of their sons.

¹⁷·⁹He who conceals an offense seeks love, but he who
repeats a matter separates close friends.

¹⁷·¹²Let a man meet a bear robbed of her cubs, rath-
er than a fool in his folly.

¹⁷·²¹He who sires a fool does so to his own sorrow,
and the father of a fool has no joy. ²⁵A foolish son
is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her who
bore him.

¹⁸·¹He who isolates himself seeks his own desire, and
rebels against all sound wisdom.

¹⁸·²²He who finds a wife finds a good thing, and
obtains favor from Gᴏᴅ.

¹⁸·²⁴He who has many friends comes to ruin, but there
is a friend who stays closer than a brother.

¹⁹·¹⁴A house and wealth are inherited from fathers,
but a prudent wife is from Gᴏᴅ.

²⁰·²A kingʼs terror is like the lionʼs roar; he who
provokes him to anger forfeits his own life.

²⁰·¹⁹A gossip reveals secrets, therefore donʼt asso-
ciate with him who talks too much.

²²·⁶Train up a child in the way he should go; even
when he is old he wonʼt depart from it.

²⁵·¹⁷Seldom set foot in your neighborʼs house, lest
he grow weary of you, and hate you.

²⁹·³He who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, but
a companion of prostitutes wastes his wealth.

# Instruction

⁸·¹Doesnʼt wisdom call, and understanding raise her
voice? ⁴“To you, O men, I call, and my voice is to
the sons of men. ⁵O naive ones, learn prudence. O
fools, learn sense. ¹⁰Take my instruction instead of
silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold. ¹¹For
wisdom is better than jewels, and all desirable
things cannot compare to it. ²²Gᴏᴅ possessed me at
the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
²⁷When he established the heavens, I was there.
³²Now, my sons, listen to me, for blessed are those
who keep my ways. ³³Listen to instruction and be
wise. Donʼt neglect it. ³⁵For he who finds me finds
life, and will obtain favor of Gᴏᴅ.”

⁹·⁸Donʼt reprove a scoffer, or he will hate you. Re-
prove a wise man, and he will love you. ⁹Instruct a
wise man, and he will be wiser still. Teach a right-
eous man, and he will increase in learning. ¹⁰The
fear of Gᴏᴅ is the beginning of wisdom.

¹⁰·¹⁷He who heeds instruction is on the path of life,
but he who ignores reproof goes astray.

¹²·¹⁵The foolʼs way is right in his own eyes, but a
wise man listens to counsel.

¹³·¹⁴The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life,
turning one away from the snares of death.

¹³·¹⁸Poverty and shame will come to him who ignores
instruction, but he who heeds reproof will be
honored.

¹⁷·¹⁰A rebuke goes deeper into one who has under-
standing than a hundred lashes into a fool.

¹⁹·²⁷Cease listening to instruction, my son, and you
will stray from the words of knowledge.

# Wise and Foolish

¹⁰·¹A wise son makes a father glad, but a foolish son
brings grief to his mother.

¹⁰·²³Doing wickedness is like sport to a fool, but
wisdom is pleasure to a man of understanding.

¹¹·²⁹The fool will be servant to the wise of heart.

¹²·¹⁶A foolʼs displeasure is known at once, but a pru-
dent man ignores an insult.

¹⁴·¹⁵The naive believes everything, but the prudent
considers his steps. ¹⁶A wise man is cautious and
turns away from evil, but a fool is reckless and care-
less.

¹⁷·²A prudent servant will rule over a shameful son,
and will share the inheritance among the brothers.

²²·³The prudent sees danger and hides himself, but
the naive go on and suffer for it.

# Righteous and Wicked

¹⁰·²Ill-gotten gains do not profit, but righteous-
ness delivers from death. ³Gᴏᴅ will not let the right-
eous go hungry, but he thwarts the craving of the
wicked.

¹⁰·⁷The memory of the righteous is a blessing, but
the name of the wicked will rot.

¹⁰·²⁰The tongue of the righteous is like choice sil-
ver; the heart of the wicked is of little worth.
²¹The lips of the righteous feed many, but fools die
for lack of sense.

¹⁰·²⁷The fear of Gᴏᴅ prolongs life, but the years of
the wicked will be shortened.

¹¹·⁵The righteousness of the blameless will direct
his way, but the wicked will fall by his own wicked-
ness. ⁶The righteousness of the upright will rescue
them, but the treacherous will be trapped by their
own desires. ⁸The righteous is delivered from trou-
ble, but the wicked takes his place.

¹¹·¹⁸The wicked earns deceptive wages, but he who
sows righteousness gets a sure reward.

¹¹·²³The desire of the righteous turns out well, but
the expectation of the wicked is wrath.

¹¹·³¹If the righteous will be rewarded on earth, how
much more the wicked and the sinner.

¹²·³A man will not be established by wickedness, but
the root of the righteous will not be moved. ⁷The
wicked are overthrown and are no more, but the house
of the righteous will stand.

¹²·²⁶The righteous is a guide to his neighbor, but
the way of the wicked leads them astray.

¹³·²¹Disaster pursues sinners, but the righteous will
be rewarded with good.

¹³·²⁵The righteous has enough to satisfy his appe-
tite, but the stomach of the wicked is empty.

¹⁴·¹⁹The evil bow down before the good, and the wick-
ed at the gates of the righteous.

¹⁴·²²Wonʼt they who devise evil go astray? But those
who devise good will find kindness and truth.

¹⁴·³⁴Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a dis-
grace to any people.

¹⁵·⁸The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
Gᴏᴅ, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

²¹·¹⁵When justice is done, it is a joy to the right-
eous, but a terror to evildoers.

²⁸·¹The wicked flee when no one pursues, but the
righteous are as bold as a lion.

# Diligence

¹⁰·⁴A slack hand causes poverty, but a diligent hand
makes rich. ⁵A son who gathers in the summer is pru-
dent, but one who sleeps during harvest is shameful.

¹⁰·²⁶Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,
so is the idler to those who send him.

¹²·²⁴The hand of the diligent will rule, but the
slothful will be put to forced labor.

¹³·⁴The idler craves, yet gets nothing, but the dili-
gent is fully satisfied.

¹⁴·²³There is profit in all labor, but mere talk
leads only to poverty.

¹⁶·²⁶A workerʼs appetite works for him, for his hun-
ger urges him on.

¹⁸·⁹Whoever is slack in his work is brother to him
who destroys.

¹⁹·¹⁵Laziness brings on deep sleep, and an idle man
will suffer hunger.

¹⁹·²⁴The idler buries his hand in the dish, but will
not even bring it back to his mouth.

²⁰·⁴The idler doesnʼt plow in season, so he looks dur-
ing harvest, and has nothing.

²⁰·¹³Donʼt love sleep, lest you come to poverty. O-
pen your eyes, and you will have plenty of food.

²²·¹³The idler says, “Thereʼs a lion outside. Iʼll be
killed in the streets.”

²⁶·¹⁴As a door turns on its hinges, so does the i-
dler on his bed.

²⁶·¹⁶The idler is wiser in his own eyes than seven
men who can answer sensibly.

²⁷·²³Know well the condition of your flocks, and pay
attention to your herds; ²⁴for riches arenʼt forever
and a crown doesnʼt endure to all generations.

²⁸·¹⁹He who works his land will have plenty of food,
but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plen-
ty of poverty.

# Integrity

¹⁰·⁹He who walks in integrity walks securely, but he
who perverts his ways will be found out.

¹¹·³The integrity of the upright will guide them, but
the perversity of the treacherous will destroy them.

²⁰·⁷A righteous man who walks in his integrity; bless-
ed are his children after him.

²¹·³To do righteousness and justice is more accepta-
ble to Gᴏᴅ than sacrifice. ²⁷The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination; how much more when he
brings it with evil intent.

²⁸·⁶Better is the poor who walks in his integrity,
than the rich who is crooked in his ways.

²⁸·¹⁸He who walks in integrity will be delivered, but
he who is crooked will suddenly fall.

# Contention

¹⁰·¹²Hatred stirs up conflict, but love covers all
offenses.

¹⁵·¹⁸A hot-tempered man stirs up conflict, but the
slow to anger calms contention.

¹⁷·¹⁴Starting a conflict is like releasing a flood,
so abandon the dispute before it breaks out.

¹⁸·¹⁸Casting the lot ends quarrels, and decides be-
tween powerful opponents.

¹⁸·¹⁹An offended brother is harder to win than a
strong city, and contentions are like the bars of a
castle.

²⁰·³Staying away from strife is an honor for a man,
but any fool will quarrel.

²¹·⁹Itʼs better to live in a corner of the roof than
in a house shared with a contentious woman. ¹⁹Itʼs
better to live in a desert than with a contentious
and complaining woman.

²²·¹⁰Drive out the mocker, and contention will de-
part, and quarrels and dishonor will cease.

²⁶·²⁰Without wood the fire goes out, and without a
gossip contention dies down. ²¹Like charcoal to hot
embers and wood to fire, so is a contentious man for
kindling strife.

# Understanding

¹⁰·¹³Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning,
but a rod is for the back of him who lacks sense.

¹³·¹⁶Every prudent man works with knowledge, but a
fool flaunts his folly.

¹⁴·¹²There is a way that seems right to a man, but
its end is the way to death.

¹⁶·¹⁶How much better to get wisdom than gold. To get
understanding is preferable to silver.

¹⁸·¹³He who answers before he listens: it is folly
and shame to him.

¹⁸·¹⁵The mind of the prudent acquires knowledge, and
the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.

¹⁹·²Enthusiasm without knowledge is not good, and
hasty feet go astray.

¹⁹·²⁰Listen to counsel and receive instruction so
that you may be wise the rest of your days.

# Speech

¹⁰·¹⁸He who conceals hatred has lying lips, and he
who spreads slander is a fool.

¹⁰·¹⁹When there are many words, transgression is una-
voidable, but he who restrains his lips is wise.

¹¹·¹²He who belittles his neighbor lacks sense, but a
man of understanding remains silent. ¹³A gossip goes
about revealing secrets, but he who is trustworthy
conceals a matter.

¹¹·²²A beautiful woman without discretion is like a
gold ring in a pigʼs snout.

¹²·¹³An evil man is ensnared by the transgression of
his lips, but the righteous will escape from trou-
ble.

¹²·¹⁸There is one who speaks rashly like thrusts of a
sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.

¹²·²³A prudent man conceals knowledge, but a foolʼs
heart proclaims folly.

¹³·³He who guards his mouth preserves his life, but
he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.

¹⁴·³In the foolʼs mouth is a rod for his back, but
the lips of the wise will protect them.

¹⁵·¹A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh
word stirs up anger. ⁴A soothing tongue is a tree of
life, but a perverse tongue breaks the spirit.

¹⁵·²³A man finds joy in giving an apt answer; and a
timely word, how good it is!

¹⁵·²⁸The heart of the righteous ponders how to an-
swer, but the mouth of the wicked blurts out evil
things.

¹⁶·²⁴Pleasant words are a honeycomb: sweet to the
soul, and health to the body.

¹⁶·²⁸A perverse man spreads strife, and a gossip sep-
arates close friends.

¹⁷·²⁷He who restrains his words has knowledge, and he
who has a cool spirit is a man of understanding. ²⁸E-
ven a fool is considered wise when he keeps silent.
When he closes his lips, he is considered prudent.

¹⁸·²A fool does not delight in understanding, but on-
ly in airing his opinion. ⁶His lips bring strife, and
his mouth invites a beating. ⁷His mouth is his ruin,
and his lips are the snare of his soul.

²⁰·¹⁵There is gold, and an abundance of jewels, but
lips of knowledge are a rare treasure.

²¹·²³He who guards his mouth and tongue keeps him-
self out of trouble.

²²·¹¹He who loves purity of heart, and speaks gra-
ciously will have the king as a friend.

²⁶·¹⁸Like a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and
death, ¹⁹is the man who deceives his neighbor, and
says, “I was only joking!”

²⁷·¹⁴He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice
early in the morning will be counted as cursing.

²⁹·²⁰Do you see a man who is hasty in his words?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.

# Honesty

¹¹·¹Dishonest scales are an abomination to Gᴏᴅ, but
an accurate weight is his delight.

¹²·²²Lying lips are an abomination to Gᴏᴅ, but those
who act faithfully are his delight.

¹⁶·¹¹A just balance and scales belong to Gᴏᴅ, all the
weights in the bag are his concern.

¹⁷·¹⁵Acquitting the guilty, and condemning the right-
eous are both alike an abomination to Gᴏᴅ.

¹⁷·²³A wicked man takes a bribe in secret to pervert
the ways of justice.

¹⁸·⁵Being partial to the wicked is not good, neither
is depriving the righteous of justice.

¹⁹·⁵A false witness will not go unpunished, and he
who speaks lies will not escape.

²⁰·¹⁷Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man, but af-
terward his mouth will be full of gravel.

²⁰·²³Differing weights are an abomination to Gᴏᴅ, and
a false scale is not good.

# Humility

¹¹·²When pride comes, then comes disgrace, but with
the humble is wisdom.

¹²·⁹Better is he who is lightly esteemed, and has a
servant, than he that honors himself, and lacks
bread.

¹⁵·²⁵Gᴏᴅ will tear down the house of the proud, but
will protect the borders of the widow.

¹⁶·⁵Everyone who is proud in heart is an abomination
to Gᴏᴅ; be assured, he will not go unpunished.

¹⁶·¹⁸Pride comes before destruction, and an arrogant
spirit before a fall.

¹⁶·¹⁹It is better to be humble in spirit among the
lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud.

¹⁸·¹²Before destruction a manʼs heart is haughty, but
humility comes before honor.

²¹·³⁰No wisdom, no understanding, and no counsel will
prevail against Gᴏᴅ.

²²·⁴The reward for humility and fear of Gᴏᴅ is rich-
es, honor, and life.

²⁶·¹²Do you see a man wise in his own eyes? There is
more hope for a fool than for him.

²⁷·¹Donʼt boast about tomorrow, for you donʼt know
what a day may bring.

²⁷·²Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a
stranger, and not your own lips.

²⁹·²³A manʼs pride will bring him low, but a humble
spirit will obtain honor.

# Counsel

¹¹·¹⁴Without guidance the people fall, but with many
counselors there is safety.

¹⁴·²⁷The fear of Gᴏᴅ is a fountain of life, turning
one away from the snares of death.

¹⁵·²²Without counsel plans fail, but with many
advisers they succeed.

¹⁶·³³The lot is cast into the lap, but its every de-
cision is from Gᴏᴅ.

²⁰·¹⁸Establish plans by counsel, and make war with
wise guidance.

# Finance

¹¹·¹⁵He who is guarantor for a stranger will surely
suffer for it, but he who hates such agreements is se-
cure.

¹¹·²⁸He who trusts in his riches will fall, but the
righteous will flourish like a green leaf.

¹³·⁷There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has
nothing. Another pretends to be poor, yet has great
wealth.

¹³·¹¹Wealth obtained by fraud will dwindle, but he
who gathers by labor will increase it.

¹³·²²A good man leaves an inheritance to his
childrenʼs children, but the sinnerʼs wealth is
stored up for the righteous.

¹⁴·⁴Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean, but
abundant harvest comes through an oxʼs strength.

¹⁴·²⁰The poor is hated even by his neighbor, but
there are many who love the rich.

¹⁵·⁶There is great wealth in the house of the right-
eous, but trouble accompanies the income of the wick-
ed.

¹⁵·²⁷He who profits illicitly troubles his own house,
but he who hates bribes will live.

¹⁶·⁸Better a little with righteousness than great in-
come with injustice.

¹⁹·⁴Wealth attracts many friends, but a poor man is
separated from his friend. ⁶Many seek a generous
manʼs favor, and everyone is a friend to him who
gives gifts. ⁷All a poor manʼs brothers hate him. How
much more do his friends avoid him! He pursues them
with words, but they are gone.

²¹·⁵The plans of the diligent lead surely to abun-
dance, but everyone who is hasty comes surely to pov-
erty.

²¹·⁶Acquiring treasures by a lying tongue is a fleet-
ing vapor and the pursuit of death.

²¹·¹⁷He who loves pleasure will become poor. He who
loves wine and oil will not get rich. ²⁰There is pre-
cious treasure and oil in a wise manʼs dwelling, but
a fool consumes them.

²²·¹A good name is to be chosen over great riches,
and favor over silver and gold.

²²·²The rich and the poor have this in common: Gᴏᴅ is
the maker of them all.

²²·⁷The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is
a slave to the lender.

²⁶·¹⁰Like an archer who wounds everyone, so is he who
hires a fool or who hires those passing by.

²⁸·²²A stingy man hastens after wealth, and doesnʼt
know that poverty will come upon him.

# Kindness

¹¹·¹⁷A kind man benefits himself, but a cruel man
harms himself.

¹²·¹⁰A righteous man has regard for the life of his
animal, but even the mercy of the wicked is cruel.

¹⁴·²¹He who despises his neighbor sins, but he who
shows kindness to the poor is happy. ³¹He who
oppresses the poor insults his maker, but he who is
kind to the needy honors him.

¹⁷·¹³If anyone returns evil for good, evil will nev-
er leave his house.

²¹·²¹He who pursues righteousness and kindness will
find life, righteousness, and honor.

²⁶·²⁷He who digs a pit will fall into it, and he who
rolls a stone, it will come back on him.

# Generosity

¹¹·²⁴One gives freely, yet increases all the more,
and another withholds what is due, but comes only to
poverty. ²⁵The generous man will prosper, and he who
waters will also be watered himself. ²⁶The people
will curse him who withholds grain, but a blessing is
on the head of him who sells it.

¹⁹·¹⁷Kindness to the poor is a loan to Gᴏᴅ, and he
will repay his good deed.

²⁰·²⁵It is a snare to say rashly, “It is holy,” and
only make inquiry after the vows.

²¹·¹³He who shuts his ear to the cry of the poor will
also call out and not be answered.

²²·⁹He who is generous will be blessed, for he shares
his bread with the poor. ¹⁶He who oppresses the poor
to increase his wealth, or who gives to the rich,
will only come to poverty.

²⁵·²¹If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat,
and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.

²⁷·⁷He who is full loathes honey, but to the hungry
any bitter thing is sweet.

²⁸·²⁷He who gives to the poor will never want, but he
who hides his eyes will have many curses.

# Emotion

¹²·²⁵Anxiety in a manʼs heart weighs it down, but a
good word makes it glad.

¹³·¹²Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but desire
fulfilled is a tree of life.

¹⁴·¹³Even in laughter the heart may ache, and joy may
end in grief.

¹⁴·¹⁷A man of quick temper acts foolishly, and a man
of evil schemes is hated. ²⁹He who is slow to anger
has great understanding, but he who has a quick tem-
per promotes folly.

¹⁴·³⁰A tranquil heart is life to the body, but envy
makes the bones rot.

¹⁵·¹³A glad heart makes a cheerful countenance, but a
sorrowful heart breaks the spirit.

¹⁵·¹⁵All the days of the afflicted are bad, but a
cheerful heart has a continual feast.

¹⁶·¹⁴A kingʼs wrath is a messenger of death, but a
wise man appeases it.

¹⁶·³²He who is slow to anger is better than the might-
y, and he who rules his spirit, than he who captures
a city.

¹⁷·⁵Whoever mocks the poor insults his maker, and he
who rejoices at calamity will not go unpunished.

¹⁷·²²A joyful heart is good medicine, but a broken
spirit dries up the bones.

¹⁸·¹⁴A manʼs spirit can endure sickness, but who can
bear a broken spirit?

¹⁹·³A manʼs foolishness ruins his way, yet his heart
rages against Gᴏᴅ.

¹⁹·¹¹Good sense makes a man slow to anger, and it is
his glory to overlook an offense.

¹⁹·¹⁹A man of great anger will pay the penalty, for
if you rescue him, you will have to do it again.

²⁰·¹Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler, and who-
ever is led astray by them is not wise.

²⁰·²²Donʼt say, “I will repay evil”. Wait for Gᴏᴅ,
and he will save you.

²⁹·¹¹A fool gives full vent to his anger, but a wise
man holds it back.
