                       Solomon

     An abridgment of the proverbs attributed to
   Solomon. Verse references such as ³·⁹ indi-
      cate the original source of the text, but
            don't imply a full quotation.


# My Son

³·¹My son, don't forget my teaching, but let your
heart keep my commandments, ²for they will bring you
many days, years of life, and peace.

³·³Don't let kindness and truth leave you. Tie them a-
round your neck. Write them on the tablet of your
heart. ⁴Then you will find favor and high regard in
the sight of God and man.

³·⁵Trust in GOD with all your heart, and don't lean
on your own understanding. ⁶In all your ways acknowl-
edge him, and he will make your paths straight.
⁷Don't be wise in your own eyes. Fear GOD, and turn a-
way from evil. ⁸It will be healing to your body, and
refreshment to your bones.

³·⁹Honor GOD with your wealth, and with the
firstfruits of all your produce, ¹⁰then your barns
will be filled with plenty, and your vats will over-
flow with new wine.

³·¹¹My son, don't reject the discipline of GOD or
loathe his reproof; ¹²for GOD reproves the one he
loves, just as a father reproves the son in whom he
delights.

³·¹³Happy is the man who finds wisdom, and the man
who gains understanding. ¹⁴For she is more profita-
ble than silver, and her gain is better than fine
gold. ¹⁵She is more precious than jewels, and noth-
ing you desire compares with her. ¹⁶Long life is in
her right hand. In her left hand are riches and hon-
or. ¹⁷Her ways are pleasant, and all her paths are
peaceful. ¹⁸She is a tree of life to those who take
hold of her. Those who hold her fast are happy.

³·¹⁹GOD founded the earth by wisdom. He established
the heavens by understanding. ²⁰By his knowledge the
depths broke open, and the clouds drip with dew.

³·²¹My son, don't lose sight of them. Keep sound wis-
dom and discretion. ²²Th+ey will be life for your
soul, and adornment for your neck. ²³Then you will
walk on your way securely, and your foot won't stum-
ble. ²⁴When you lie down, you won't be afraid. When
you lie down, your sleep will be sweet.

³·²⁵Don't fear sudden disaster or the ruin of the
wicked when it comes, ²⁶for GOD will be your confi-
dence, and will keep your foot from being caught.

³·²⁷Don't withhold good from those who deserve it,
when it is in your power to do it. ²⁸Don't say to
your neighbor, “Go, and come back. I'll give it to-
morrow,” when you have it with you. ²⁹Don't plan evil
against your neighbor, who lives trustingly beside
you.

³·³⁰Don't contend with a man without cause, when he
has done you no harm. ³¹Don't envy a violent man or
choose any of his ways, ³²for the devious are an a-
bomination to GOD, but he is a friend to the up-
right.

³·³³The curse of GOD is on the house of the wicked,
but he blesses the dwelling of the righteous. ³⁴He
mocks the mockers, but shows favor to the humble.
³⁵The wise will inherit honor, but fools get shame.

—

⁴·¹Listen, sons, to a father's instruction, and pay
attention so that you may gain understanding. ²For I
give you sound instruction. Don't abandon my teach-
ing.

⁴·³When I was a son to my father, tender and the on-
ly son in my mother's sight, ⁴he taught me, and said
to me: “Let your heart hold on to my words. Keep my
commandments and live. ⁵Get wisdom. Get understand-
ing. Don't forget or turn away from the words of my
mouth. ⁶Don't forsake her, and she will guard you.
Love her, and she will watch over you. ⁷The begin-
ning of wisdom is this: Get wisdom, and whatever else
you get, get understanding. ⁸Prize her, and she will
exalt you. If you embrace her, she will honor you.
⁹She will place on your head a garland of grace. She
will present you with a crown of beauty.)

⁴·¹⁰Listen, my son, and accept my sayings, and the
years of your life will be many. ¹¹I have taught you
in the way of wisdom. I have led you in upright
paths. ¹²When you walk, your steps won't be hindered.
When you run, you won't stumble. ¹³Hold on to in-
struction. Don't let go. Guard her, for she is your
life.

⁴·¹⁴Don't enter the path of the wicked, and don't
walk in the way of evil men. ¹⁵Avoid it. Don't trav-
el on it. Turn away from it, and pass on. ¹⁶For they
cannot sleep unless they do evil. They are robbed of
sleep unless they make someone stumble. ¹⁷For they
eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of vi-
olence. ¹⁸But the path of the righteous is like the
light of dawn, which shines brighter and brighter un-
til midday. ¹⁹The way of the wicked is like dark-
ness. They don't know what makes them stumble.

⁴·²⁰My son, pay attention to my words. Listen care-
fully to my sayings. ²¹Don't lose sight of them. Keep
them within your heart. ²²For they are life to those
who find them, and health to their whole body.

⁴·²³Watch over your heart with all diligence, for the
springs of life flow from it. ²⁴Put away from you de-
ceitful speech, and put devious talk far from you.

⁴·²⁵Let your eyes look directly ahead and your gaze
straight in front of you. ²⁶Carefully consider the
path of your feet, then all your ways will be sure.
²⁷Don't turn to the right or to the left. Keep your
foot from evil.

—

⁵·¹My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen care-
fully to my understanding, ²that you may maintain dis-
cretion, and that your lips may guard knowledge.

⁵·³The lips of a forbidden woman drip honey, and her
speech is smoother than oil, ⁴but in the end she's as
bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a double-edged
sword. ⁵Her feet go down to death. Her steps lead
straight to hell. ⁶She doesn't ponder the path of
life. Her ways are unstable, and she doesn't know it.

⁵·⁷Now then, my sons, listen to me, and don't depart
from the words of my mouth. ⁸Keep your way far from
her. Don't go near the door of her house ⁹lest you
give your vigor to others and your years to someone
cruel, ¹⁰lest strangers feast on your wealth, your
labors enrich the house of a foreigner, ¹¹and at the
end of your life you groan when your flesh and body
are consumed. ¹²You will say, “How I hated disci-
pline! How my heart despised reproof! ¹³I didn't o-
bey my teachers or listen to my instructors! ¹⁴I am
almost in utter ruin in the midst of the assembly and
congregation.)

⁵·¹⁵Drink water from your own cistern, and fresh wa-
ter from your own well. ¹⁶Should your springs be
scattered abroad, streams of water in the streets?
¹⁷Let them be yours alone, and not for strangers with
you. ¹⁸Let your fountain be blessed, and rejoice in
the wife of your youth, ¹⁹as a loving deer and a
graceful doe. Let her breasts satisfy you always, and
be exhilarated always with her love.

⁵·²⁰Why, my son, should you be exhilarated with a for-
bidden woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger?
²¹For a man's ways are before the eyes of GOD, and he
considers all his paths. ²²The iniquities of the wick-
ed entrap him. He is held in the cords of his sin.
²³He dies for lack of discipline, and because of his
great folly he will go astray.

—

⁶·¹My son, if you have put up security for your neigh-
bor or have given a pledge for a stranger, ²if you
have been snared or caught with the words of your
mouth, ³then do this, my son, and free yourself. You
have fallen into your neighbor's hands. Go, humble
yourself, and plead with your neighbor. ⁴Give your
eyes no sleep and your eyelids no slumber. ⁵Save your-
self like a gazelle from the hunter's hand, and like
a bird from the fowler's hand.

⁶·⁶Go to the ant, you idler. Observe its ways, and be
wise. ⁷Without chief, officer, or ruler, ⁸it prepares
its provisions in summer, and gathers its food dur-
ing harvest.

⁶·⁹How long will you lie down, you idler? When will
you get up from your sleep? ¹⁰A little sleep, a lit-
tle slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,
¹¹and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and
want like an armed man.

⁶·¹²A worthless person, a wicked man, goes around
speaking perversely. ¹⁴With perversity in his heart,
he devises evil continually, and sows discord.
¹⁵Therefore calamity will strike him suddenly. In-
stantly he will be broken beyond healing.

⁶·¹⁶Seven things are an abomination to GOD:
¹⁷hau+gh+ty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed in-
nocent blood, ¹⁸a heart that devises wicked plans,
feet that run swiftly to evil, ¹⁹a false witness who
utters lies, and one who sows discord among brothers.

⁶·²⁰My son, keep your father's command, and don't for-
sake your mother's teaching. ²¹Always bind them on
your heart. Tie them around your neck. ²²Wh+en you
walk, they will guide you. When you sleep, they will
watch over you. When you wake up, they will talk to
you. ²³For this command is a lamp, this teaching is a
light, and corrective discipline is the way to life,
²⁴keeping you from the evil woman, from the
flattering tongue of an adulteress.

⁶·²⁵Don't desire her beauty in your heart or let her
captivate you with her eyes. ²⁶For a prostitute's fee
is only a loaf of bread, but a married woman hunts
down a precious life.

⁶·²⁷Can a man embrace fire without burning his
clothes? ²⁸Or can he walk on hot coals without
scorching his feet? ²⁹So is he who goes in to his
neighbor's wife. None who touches her will go unpun-
ished.

⁶·³⁰People don't despise a thief if he steals to sat-
isfy his hunger, ³¹but if caught, he must repay sev-
enfold. He will give everything in his house.

⁶·³²He who commits adultery lacks sen+se, and
destroys himself. ³³He will get wounds and dishonor,
and his disgrace won't be erased. ³⁴For jealousy
enrages a husband, and he will show no mercy in the
day of vengeance. ³⁵He won't accept compensation. He
will refuse, though you give many gifts.

# Relationships

⁷·¹⁰A woman met him, dressed as a prostitute, and cun-
ning of heart. ¹³She seizes him, kisses him, and bra-
zenly says to him, ¹⁴“I had to offer peace offerings.
Today I've paid my vows. ¹⁶I've spread my couch with
coverings, with colored linens from Egypt. ¹⁸Come,
let's drink our fill of love until morning. Let's de-
light ourselves with caresses.) ²¹She seduces him
with her persuasive speech. With her flattering lips
she lures him. ²²He follows her at once, like an ox
going to the slaughter, like a deer stepping into a
trap. ²⁵Don't let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Don't stray into her paths. ²⁶For she has cast down
many victims, and all her slain are numerous.

¹¹·²⁹He who troubles his own house will inherit the
wind.

¹²·⁴An excellent wife is her husband's crown, but she
who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.

¹³·²⁰He who walks with wise men will become wise, but
the companion of fools will suffer harm. ²⁴He who
spares the rod hates his son, but he who loves him
disciplines him diligently.

¹⁴·⁷Leave the presence of a fool, for you won't find
knowledge in his speech. ²⁸A large population is a
king's glory, but without people a prince is ruined.

¹⁵·¹⁷Better is a serving of vegetables where there is
love, than a fattened ox served with hatred.

¹⁶·⁷When a man's ways please GOD, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him.

¹⁷·⁶Grandchildren are the crown of old men, and
fathers are the glory of their sons. ⁹He who conceals
an offense seeks love, but he who repeats a matter
separates close friends. ¹²Let a man meet a bear
robbed of her cubs, rather than a fool in his folly.
¹⁷A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born
for adversity. ²¹He who sires a fool does so to his
own sorrow, and the father of a fool has no joy. ²⁵A
foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness
to her who bore him.

¹⁸·¹He who isolates himself seeks his own desire, and
rebels against all sound wisdom. ²²He who finds a
wife finds a good thing, and obtains favor from GOD.
²⁴He who has many friends comes to ruin, but there is
a friend who stays closer than a brother.

¹⁹·¹³A foolish son is ruin to his father, and a
wife's contentions are a constant dripping. ¹⁴A house
and wealth are inherited from fathers, but a prudent
wife is from GOD.

²⁰·²A king's terror is like the lion's roar; he who
provokes him to anger forfeits his own life. ¹⁹A gos-
sip reveals secrets, therefore don't associate with
him who talks too much.

²²·⁶Train up a child in the way he should go; even
when he is old he won't depart from it.

²⁵·¹⁷Seldom set foot in your neighbor's house, lest
he grow weary of you, and hate you.

²⁹·³He who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, but
a companion of prostitutes wastes his wealth.

# Instruction

⁸·¹Doesn't wisdom call, and understanding raise her
voice? ⁴“To you, O men, I call, and my voice is to
the sons of men. ⁵O naive ones, learn prudence. O
fools, learn sense. ¹⁰Take my instruction instead of
silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold. ¹¹For
wisdom is better than jewels, and all desirable
things cannot compare to it. ²²GOD possessed me at
the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
²⁷When he established the heavens, I was there.
³²Now, my sons, listen to me, for blessed are those
who keep my ways. ³³Listen to instruction and be
wise. Don't neglect it. ³⁵For he who finds me finds
life, and will obtain favor of GOD.)

⁹·⁸Don't reprove a scoffer, or he will hate you. Re-
prove a wise man, and he will love you. ⁹Instruct a
wise man, and he will be wiser still. Teach a right-
eous man, and he will increase in learning. ¹⁰The
fear of GOD is the beginning of wisdom. Knowledge of
the Holy One is understanding.

¹⁰·⁸The wise of heart will receive commands, but a
babbling fool will be ruined. ¹⁷He who heeds instruc-
tion is on the path of life, but he who ignores re-
proof goes astray.

¹²·¹Whoever loves discipline loves kn+owl+edge, but
he who hates reproof is stupid. ¹⁵The fool's way is
right in his own eyes, but a wise man listens to coun-
sel.

¹³·¹A wise son hears his father's instruction, but a
scoffer doesn't listen to rebuke. ¹⁰Insolence brings
only strife, but wisdom is with those who take ad-
vice. ¹³Whoever despises instruction will pay the pen-
alty, but he who respects a command will be rewarded.
¹⁴The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life,
turning one away from the snares of death. ¹⁸Poverty
and shame will come to him who ignores instruction,
but he who heeds reproof will be honored.

¹⁵·⁵A fool despises his father's instruction, but he
who heeds reproof is prudent. ¹⁰There is harsh disci-
pline for him who forsakes the way, and he who hates
reproof will die. ³¹The ear that listens to life-
giving reproof will dwell among the wise. ³²He who
ignores instruction despises himself, but he who
listens to reproof gains understanding.

¹⁷·¹⁰A rebuke goes deeper into one who has under-
standing than a hundred lashes into a fool.

¹⁹·²⁷Cease listening to instruction, my son, and you
will stray from the words of knowledge.

# Wise and Foolish

¹⁰·¹A wise son makes a father glad, but a foolish son
brings grief to his mother. ²³Doing wickedness is
like sport to a fool, but wisdom is pleasure to a man
of understanding.

¹¹·²⁹He who troubles his own household will inherit
the wind, and the fool will be servant to the wise of
heart.

¹²·⁸A man is praised according to his insight, but
one of twisted mind is despised. ¹⁶A fool's displeas-
ure is known at once, but a prudent man ignores an in-
sult.

¹⁴·¹⁵The naive believes everything, but the prudent
considers his steps. ¹⁶A wise man is cautious and
turns away from evil, but a fool is reckless and care-
less. ³⁵The king favors a servant who acts wisely,
but his wrath falls on one who acts shamefully.

¹⁵·⁷The lips of the wise spread knowledge, but not so
the hearts of fools. ²⁰A wise son makes a father
glad, but a foolish man despises his mother.

¹⁷·²A prudent servant will rule over a shameful son,
and will share the inheritance among the brothers.

²²·³The prudent sees danger and hides himself, but
the naive go on and suffer for it.

# Righteous and Wicked

¹⁰·²Ill-gotten gains do not profit, but righteous-
ness delivers from death. ³GOD will not let the right-
eous go hungry, but he thwarts the craving of the
wicked. ⁶Blessings are on the head of the righteous,
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence. ⁷The
memory of the righteous is a blessing, but the name
of the wicked will rot. ¹⁶The wages of the righteous
is life; the gain of the wicked is punishment. ²⁰The
tongue of the righteous is like choice silver; the
heart of the wicked is of little worth. ²¹The lips of
the righteous feed many, but fools die for lack of
sense. ²⁴What the wicked dreads will come upon him,
but the desire of the righteous will be granted.
²⁷The fear of GOD prolongs life, but the years of the
wicked will be shortened.

¹¹·⁵The righteousness of the blameless will direct
his way, but the wicked will fall by his own wicked-
ness. ⁶The righteousness of the upright will rescue
them, but the treacherous will be trapped by their
own desires. ⁸The righteous is delivered from trou-
ble, but the wicked takes his place. ¹⁸The wicked
earns deceptive wages, but he who sows righteousness
gets a sure reward. ²³The desire of the righteous
turns out well, but the expectation of the wicked is
wrath. ²⁷He who diligently seeks good seeks favor,
but evil comes to him who searches for it. ³¹If the
righteous will be rewarded on earth, how much more
the wicked and the sinner.

¹²·³A man will not be established by wickedness, but
the root of the righteous will not be moved. ⁵The
thoughts of the righteous are just, but the counsels
of the wicked are deceitful. ⁷The wicked are
overthrown and are no more, but the house of the
righteous will stand. ²¹No harm befalls the right-
eous, but the wicked are filled with evil. ²⁶The
righteous is a guide to his neighbor, but the way of
the wicked leads them astray.

¹³·⁹The light of the righteous shines brightly, but
the lamp of the wicked will be put out. ²¹Disaster
pursues sinners, but the righteous will be rewarded
with good. ²⁵The righteous has enough to satisfy his
appetite, but the stomach of the wicked is empty.

¹⁴·¹¹The house of the wicked will be destroyed, but
the tent of the upright will flourish. ¹⁹The evil bow
down before the good, and the wicked at the gates of
the righteous. ²²Won't they who devise evil go a-
stray? But those who devise good will find kindness
and truth. ³⁴Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin
is a disgrace to any people.

¹⁵·⁸The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
GOD, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

²¹·¹⁵When justice is done, it is a joy to the right-
eous, but a terror to evildoers.

²²·⁵Thorns and snares are in the way of the crooked.
He who guards himself will be far from them.

²⁸·¹The wicked flee when no one pursues, but the
righteous are as bold as a lion.

# Diligence

¹⁰·⁴A slack hand causes poverty, but a diligent hand
makes rich. ⁵A son who gathers in the summer is pru-
dent, but one who sleeps during harvest is shameful.
²⁶Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, so
is the idler to those who send him.

¹²·¹¹He who works his land will have plenty of bread,
but he who follows worthless pursuits lacks sense.
²⁴The hand of the diligent will rule, but the sloth-
ful will be put to forced labor.

¹³·⁴The idler craves, yet gets nothing, but the dili-
gent is fully satisfied.

¹⁴·²³There is profit in all labor, but mere talk
leads only to poverty.

¹⁵·¹⁹The way of the idler is like a hedge of thorns,
but the path of the upright is a highway.

¹⁶·³Commit your work to GOD, and your plans will be
established. ²⁶A worker's appetite works for him, for
his hunger urges him on.

¹⁸·⁹Whoever is slack in his work is brother to him
who destroys.

¹⁹·¹⁵Laziness brings on deep sleep, and an idle man
will suffer hunger. ²⁴The idler buries his hand in
the dish, but will not even bring it back to his
mouth.

²⁰·⁴The idler doesn't plow in season, so he looks dur-
ing harvest, and has nothing. ¹³Don't love sleep,
lest you come to poverty. Open your eyes, and you
will have plenty of food.

²¹·²⁵The desire of the idler kills him, for his hands
refuse to work.

²²·¹³The idler says, “There's a lion outside. I'll be
killed in the streets.”

²⁶·¹⁴As a door turns on its hinges, so does the i-
dler on his bed. ¹⁶The idler is wiser in his own eyes
than seven men who can answer sensibly.

²⁷·²³Know well the condition of your flocks, and pay
attention to your herds; ²⁴for riches aren't forever
and a crown doesn't endure to all generations.

²⁸·¹⁹He who works his land will have plenty of food,
but he who follows worthless pursuits will have plen-
ty of poverty.

# Integrity

¹⁰·⁹He who walks in integrity walks securely, but he
who perverts his ways will be found out.

¹¹·³The integrity of the upright will guide them, but
the perversity of the tr+each+er+ous will destroy
them.

²⁰·⁷A righteous man who walks in his integrity; bless-
ed are his children after him.

²¹·³To do righteousness and justice is more accepta-
ble to GOD than sacrifice. ²⁷The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination; how much more when he
brings it with evil intent.

²⁸·⁶Better is the poor who walks in his integrity,
than the rich who is crooked in his ways. ¹⁸He who
walks in integrity will be delivered, but he who is
crooked will suddenly fall.

# Speech

¹⁰·¹¹The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of
life, but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
¹⁸He who conceals hatred has lying lips, and he who
spreads slander is a fool. ¹⁹When there are many
words, transgression is unavoidable, but he who
restrains his lips is wise. ³¹The mouth of the right-
eous brings forth wisdom, but the perverse tongue
will be cut out. ³²The lips of the righteous know
what is acceptable, but the mouth of the wicked what
is perverse.

¹¹·¹²He who belittles his neighbor lacks sense, but a
man of understanding remains silent. ¹³A gossip goes
about revealing secrets, but he who is trustworthy
conceals a matter. ²²A beautiful woman without dis-
cretion is like a gold ring in a pig's snout.

¹²·¹³An evil man is ensnared by the transgression of
his lips, but the righteous will escape from trou-
ble. ¹⁸There is one who speaks rashly like thrusts of
a sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.
²³A prudent man conceals knowledge, but a fool's
heart proclaims folly.

¹³·³He who guards his mouth preserves his life, but
he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.

¹⁴·³In the fool's mouth is a rod for his back, but
the lips of the wise will protect them.

¹⁵·¹A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh
word stirs up anger. ⁴A soothing tongue is a tree of
life, but a perverse tongue breaks the spirit. ²³A
man finds joy in giving an apt answer; and a timely
word, how good it is! ²⁸The heart of the righteous
ponders how to answer, but the mouth of the wicked
blurts out evil things.

¹⁶·²³The heart of the wise instructs his mouth, and
adds persuasion to his lips. ²⁴Pleasant words are a
honeycomb: sweet to the soul, and health to the bod-
y. ²⁸A perverse man spreads strife, and a gossip sep-
arates close friends.

¹⁷·⁷Excellent speech is not fitting for a fool, much
less lying lips for a prince. ²⁷He who restrains his
words has knowledge, and he who has a cool spirit is
a man of understanding. ²⁸Even a fool is considered
wise when he keeps silent. When he closes his lips,
he is considered prudent.

¹⁸·²A fool does not delight in understanding, but on-
ly in airing his opinion. ⁶A fool's lips bring
strife, and his mouth invites a beating. ⁷A fool's
mouth is his ruin, and his lips are the snare of his
soul.

²⁰·¹⁵There is gold, and an abundance of jewels, but
lips of knowledge are a rare treasure.

²¹·²³He who guards his mouth and ton+gue keeps him-
self out of trouble.

²²·¹¹He who loves purity of heart, and speaks gra-
ciously will have the king as a friend.

²⁶·¹⁸Like a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and
death, ¹⁹is the man who deceives his neighbor, and
says, “I was only joking!”

²⁷·¹⁴He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice
early in the morning will be counted as cursing.

²⁹·²⁰Do you see a man who is hasty in his words?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.

# Contention

¹⁰·¹²Hatred stirs up conflict, but love covers all
offenses.

¹⁵·¹⁸A hot-tempered man stirs up conflict, but the
slow to anger calms contention.

¹⁷·¹⁴Starting a conflict is like releasing a flood,
so abandon the dispute before it breaks out.

¹⁸·¹⁸Casting the lot ends quarrels, and decides be-
tween powerful opponents. ¹⁹An offended brother is
harder to win than a strong city, and contentions are
like the bars of a castle.

²⁰·³Staying away from strife is an honor for a man,
but any fool will quarrel.

²¹·⁹It's better to live in a corner of the roof than
in a house shared with a contentious woman. ¹⁹It's
better to live in a desert than with a contentious
and complaining woman.

²²·¹⁰Drive out the mocker, and contention will de-
part, and quarrels and dishonor will cease.

²⁶·²⁰Without wood the fire goes out, and without a
gossip contention dies down. ²¹Like charcoal to hot
embers and wood to fire, so is a contentious man for
kindling strife.

# Understanding

¹⁰·¹³Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning,
but a rod is for the back of him who lacks sense.

¹³·¹⁶Every prudent man works with knowledge, but a
fool flaunts his folly.

¹⁴·¹²There is a way that seems right to a man, but
its end is the way to death.

¹⁶·¹⁶How much better to get wisdom than gold. To get
understanding is preferable to silver.

¹⁸·¹³He who answers before he listens: it is folly
and shame to him. ¹⁵The mind of the prudent acquires
knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.

¹⁹·²Enthusiasm without knowledge is not good, and
hasty feet go astray. ⁸He who gets wisdom loves his
own soul. He who keeps understanding will find good.
²⁰Listen to counsel and receive instruction so that
you may be wise the rest of your days.

# Honesty

¹¹·¹Dishonest scales are an abomination to GOD, but
an accurate weight is his delight.

¹²·¹⁹Truthful lips endure forever, but a lying tongue
is only for a moment. ²²Lying lips are an abomina-
tion to GOD, but those who act faithfully are his de-
light.

¹⁶·¹¹A just balance and scales belong to GOD, all the
weights in the bag are his concern.

¹⁷·¹⁵Acquitting the guilty, and condemning the right-
eous are both alike an abomination to GOD. ²³A wick-
ed man takes a bribe in secret to pervert the ways of
justice.

¹⁸·⁵Being partial to the wicked is not good, neither
is depriving the righteous of justice.

¹⁹·⁵A false witness will not go unpunished, and he
who speaks lies will not escape.

²⁰·¹⁷Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man, but af-
terward his mouth will be full of gravel. ²³Differing
weights are an abomination to GOD, and a false scale
is not good.

# Humility

¹¹·²When pride comes, then comes disgrace, but with
the humble is wisdom.

¹²·⁹Better is he who is lightly esteemed, and has a
servant, than he that honors himself, and lacks
bread.

¹⁵·²⁵GOD will tear down the house of the proud, but
will protect the borders of the widow. ³³Wisdom
teaches the fear of GOD, and humility comes before
honor.

¹⁶·⁵Everyone who is proud in heart is an abomination
to GOD; be assured, he will not go unpunished.
¹⁸Pride comes before destruction, and an arrogant
spirit before a fall. ¹⁹It is better to be humble in
spirit among the lowly, than to divide the spoil with
the proud.

¹⁸·¹²Before destruction a man's heart is haughty, but
humility comes before honor.

²¹·³⁰No wisdom, no understanding, and no counsel will
prevail against GOD.

²²·⁴The reward for humility and fear of GOD is rich-
es, honor, and life.

²⁶·¹²Do you see a man wise in his own eyes? There is
more hope for a fool than for him.

²⁷·¹Don't boast about tomorrow, for you don't know
what a day may bring. ²Let another praise you, and
not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own
lips.

²⁹·²³A man's pride will bring him low, but a humble
spirit will obtain honor.

# Finance

¹¹·¹⁵He who is guarantor for a stranger will surely
suffer for it, but he who hates such agreements is se-
cure. ²⁸He who trusts in his riches will fall, but
the righteous will flourish like a green leaf.

¹³·⁷There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has
nothing. Another pretends to be poor, yet has great
wealth. ¹¹Wealth obtained by fraud will dwindle, but
he who gathers by labor will increase it. ²²A good
man leaves an inheritance to his children's chil-
dren, but the sinner's wealth is stored up for the
righteous.

¹⁴·⁴Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean, but
abundant harvest comes through an ox's strength.
²⁰The poor is hated even by his neighbor, but there
are many who love the rich.

¹⁵·⁶There is great wealth in the house of the right-
eous, but trouble accompanies the income of the wick-
ed. ¹⁶Better a little with fear of GOD than great
treasure with turmoil. ²⁷He who profits illicitly
troubles his own house, but he who hates bribes will
live.

¹⁶·⁸Better a little with righteousness than great in-
come with injustice.

¹⁹·⁴Wealth attracts many friends, but a poor man is
separated from his friend. ⁶Many seek a generous
man's favor, and everyone is a friend to him who
gives gifts. ⁷All a poor man's brothers hate him. How
much more do his friends avoid him! He pursues them
with words, but they are gone.

²¹·⁵The plans of the diligent lead surely to abun-
dance, but everyone who is hasty comes surely to pov-
erty. ⁶Acquiring treasures by a lying tongue is a
fleeting vapor and the pursuit of death. ¹⁷He who
loves pleasure will become poor. He who loves wine
and oil will not get rich. ²⁰There is precious treas-
ure and oil in a wise man's dwelling, but a fool
consumes them.

²²·¹A good name is to be chosen over great riches,
and favor over silver and gold. ²The rich and the
poor have this in common: GOD is the maker of them
all. ⁷The rich rules over the poor, and the borrower
is a slave to the lender.

²⁶·¹⁰Like an archer who wounds everyone, so is he who
hires a fool or who hires those passing by.

²⁸·²²A stingy man hastens after wealth, and doesn't
know that poverty will come upon him.

# Kindness

¹¹·¹⁷A kind man benefits himself, but a cruel man
harms himself.

¹²·¹⁰A righteous man has regard for the life of his
animal, but even the mercy of the wicked is cruel.

¹⁴·²¹He who despises his neighbor sins, but he who
shows kindness to the poor is happy. ³¹He who
oppresses the poor insults his maker, but he who is
kind to the needy honors him.

¹⁷·¹³If anyone returns evil for good, evil will nev-
er leave his house.

²¹·²¹He who pursues righteousness and kindness will
find life, righteousness, and honor.

²⁶·²⁷He who digs a pit will fall into it, and he who
rolls a stone, it will come back on him.

# Generosity

¹¹·²⁴One gives freely, yet increases all the more,
and another withholds what is due, but comes only to
poverty. ²⁵The generous man will prosper, and he who
waters will also be watered himself. ²⁶The people
will curse him who withholds grain, but a blessing is
on the head of him who sells it.

¹⁹·¹⁷Kindness to the poor is a loan to GOD, and he
will repay his good deed.

²⁰·²⁵It is a snare to say rashly, “It is holy,” and
only make inquiry after the vows.

²¹·¹³He who shuts his ear to the cry of the poor will
also call out and not be answered.

²²·⁹He who is generous will be blessed, for he shares
his bread with the poor. ¹⁶He who oppresses the poor
to increase his wealth, or who gives to the rich,
will only come to poverty.

²⁵·²¹If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat,
and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.

²⁷·⁷He who is full loathes honey, but to the hungry
any bitter thing is sweet.

²⁸·²⁷He who gives to the poor will never want, but he
who hides his eyes will have many curses.

# Emotion

¹²·²⁵Anxiety in a man's heart weighs it down, but a
good word makes it glad.

¹³·¹²Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but desire
fulfilled is a tree of life.

¹⁴·¹³Even in laughter the heart may ache, and joy may
end in grief.

¹⁴·¹⁷A man of quick temper acts foolishly, and a man
of evil schemes is hated. ²⁹He who is slow to anger
has great understanding, but he who has a quick tem-
per promotes folly. ³⁰A tranquil heart is life to the
body, but envy makes the bones rot.

¹⁵·¹³A glad heart makes a cheerful countenance, but a
sorrowful heart breaks the spirit. ¹⁵All the days of
the afflicted are bad, but a cheerful heart has a con-
tinual feast.

¹⁶·¹⁴A king's wrath is a messenger of death, but a
wise man appeases it. ³²He who is slow to anger is
better than the mighty, and he who rules his spirit,
than he who captures a city.

¹⁷·⁵Whoever mocks the poor insults his maker, and he
who rejoices at calamity will not go unpunished. ²²A
joyful heart is good medicine, but a broken spirit
dries up the bones.

¹⁸·¹⁴A man's spirit can endure sickness, but who can
bear a broken spirit?

¹⁹·³A man's foolishness ruins his way, yet his heart
rages against GOD. ¹¹Good sense makes a man slow to
anger, and it is his glory to overlook an offense.
¹⁹A man of great anger will pay the penalty, for if
you rescue him, you will have to do it again.

²⁰·¹Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler, and who-
ever is led astray by them is not wise. ²²Don't say,
“I will repay evil”. Wait for GOD, and he will save
you.

²⁹·¹¹A fool gives full vent to his anger, but a wise
man holds it back. ²²An angry man stirs up strife,
and a hot-tempered man abounds in transgression.

# And More

¹⁰·²²The blessing of GOD enriches, and he adds no sor-
row to it.

¹¹·¹⁴Without guidance the people fall, but with many
counselors there is safety.

¹⁴·²⁷The fear of GOD is a fountain of life, turning
one away from the snares of death.

¹⁵·⁹The way of the wicked is an abomination to GOD,
but he loves him who pursues righteousness. ²²With-
out counsel plans fail, but with many advisers they
succeed.

¹⁶·³³The lot is cast into the lap, but its every de-
cision is from GOD.

¹⁷·⁴An evildoer listens to wicked lips, and a liar
pays attention to a destructive tongue.

²⁰·¹⁸Establish plans by counsel, and make war with
wise guidance.

