                       Muhammad

      An abridgment of the Qurʼan. Verse refer-
      ences such as ²·² indicate the original
     source of the text, but donʼt imply a full
                      quotation.


¹·¹In the name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.
²All praise is owed to God, sustainer of the worlds,
⁴Master of the Day of Judgment. ⁵You alone we wor-
ship, and you alone we ask for help. ⁶Guide us to the
straight path; ⁷the path of those you have blessed,
not of those who earned your anger, nor of those who
stray.

—

²·²This book is a guidance for those conscious of
God, ³who believe in the unseen, are steadfast in
prayer, give out of what We have provided them, ⁴be-
lieve in the revelation sent to you, Muhammad, and
what was sent before your time, and who have firm
faith in the hereafter. ⁵They are following guidance
from their Lord, and they will prosper. ⁶As for those
who disbelieve, it is the same to them whether you
warn them or not: they wonʼt believe.

²·⁴²Donʼt mix truth with falsehood, nor knowingly con-
ceal the truth. ⁴³Be steadfast in prayer, spend in
charity, and bow down with those who bow down in wor-
ship.

²·⁴⁴Do you enjoin righteousness on the people and for-
get to do it yourselves, even though you recite the
Scripture? Have you no sense? ⁴⁵Seek help with pa-
tience and prayer. It is difficult indeed, except for
the humble, ⁴⁶who are certain that they will meet
their Lord and return to Him.

²·⁶²All who believe in God and the Last Day, and do
righteousness, will have their reward with their
Lord. They will have no fear, nor will they grieve.

²·⁷⁹Woe to those who write a book with their own
hands then say, “This is from God,” in order to sell
it for a small price!

²·¹¹¹They say, “None will enter Paradise unless he is
a Jew or a Christian.” ¹¹²In fact, whoever submits
himself wholly to God and does good will have his re-
ward with his Lord.

²·¹³⁵They say, “Become Jews or Christians, then you
will be rightly guided.” ¹³⁶Say, “We believe in God,
and the revelation given to us, and to Abraham,
Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and their descendants, and the
revelation given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets
from their Lord. We make no distinction between any
of them, and we submit to Him.”

²·¹⁵³Believers, seek help through patience and pray-
er. For God is with the steadfast.

²·¹⁷²Believers, eat the good things We have provided
for you, and be grateful to God, if it is Him you wor-
ship.

²·¹⁷⁷Righteousness is not turning your faces towards
east or west, but righteousness is one who believes
in God, the Last Day, the angels, the Book, and the
prophets; who gives of his wealth, even though he
loves it, to relatives, orphans, the needy, the trav-
eler, beggars, and for freeing slaves; who are stead-
fast in prayer, and spend in charity; who keep their
promises; and are patient in poverty, adversity, and
during battle. These ones are true, and conscious of
God.

²·¹⁸⁰When death approaches any of you and he leaves
behind wealth, it is prescribed that he make a prop-
er bequest to parents and near relatives. This is a
duty for those conscious of God. ¹⁸¹If anyone alters
the bequest after hearing it, the sin is on them: God
hears and knows all. ¹⁸²But if anyone fears that the
testator made a mistake or did wrong, and makes peace
between the heirs, he incurs no sin: God is forgiv-
ing and merciful.

²·¹⁸³Believers, fasting is prescribed for you, as it
was for those before you, that you may become con-
scious of God. ¹⁸⁴Fast for a specific number of days,
but if you are sick or traveling, make up the days
later. Those who can only fast with difficulty may
feed a poor person instead. Whoever volunteers to
give more, it is better for him. ¹⁸⁵In the month of
Ramadan the Qurʼan was revealed as a guidance for man-
kind, as a clear sign of that guidance, and as judg-
ment between right and wrong. So whoever is present
during that month should fast. God wants ease for
you, not hardship; and perhaps you will be grateful.

²·¹⁸⁸Donʼt consume one anotherʼs property unjustly,
nor use it to bribe judges, intending to consume some
of the property of others sinfully and knowingly.

²·²¹⁵Whatever you spend in charity should be for
parents, close relatives, orphans, the poor, and for
travelers. Whatever good you do, God knows it well.

²·²¹⁶You may dislike something thatʼs good for you,
and love something thatʼs bad for you. God knows, and
you do not.

²·²¹⁹They ask you about wine and gambling. Say, “In
them is great sin, yet some benefit, but the sin is
greater than the benefit.” They ask you how much they
should give. Say, “The excess.” ²²⁰They ask you a-
bout orphans. Say, “Improving their condition is
best. God knows who spoils things and who improves
them. If God had wished, He could have put you into
difficulties.”

²·²²¹Donʼt marry idolatrous women until they be-
lieve. A slave who believes is better than an idola-
tress, even if she pleases you. These invite you to
the fire.

²·²³⁸Strictly guard your habit of prayers. Stand be-
fore God in devout obedience. ²³⁹If you are in dan-
ger, pray walking or riding, but when you are se-
cure, remember God, for He taught you what you did
not know.

²·²⁵⁶There shall be no compulsion in religion. The
right path has become clear from the wrong. Whoever
rejects false gods and believes in God has grasped
the most trustworthy handhold that never breaks.

²·²⁶¹Those who spend their wealth in Godʼs cause are
like a grain of corn which grows seven ears, and each
ear has a hundred grains. ²⁶²Those who spend their
wealth in Godʼs cause will have their reward with
their Lord: they will have no fear, nor will they
grieve.

²·²⁶³Kind words and forgiveness are better than char-
ity followed by injury. ²⁶⁴Believers, donʼt cancel
your charity with reminders of your generosity or
with injury, like those who spend their wealth to be
seen of men, but do not believe in God or the Last
Day. They are like a smooth rock with dust on it.
Heavy rain falls, leaving it bare. They are unable to
keep anything they have earned. God does not guide
disbelievers. ²⁶⁵Those who spend their wealth seek-
ing to please God are like a garden on high ground.
Heavy rain falls, yielding a double harvest. If heav-
y rain doesnʼt fall, light rain will.

²·²⁶⁷Believers, give from the good things which you
have earned. Do not give from what is bad, when you
yourselves would only accept it if your eyes were
closed.

²·²⁶⁸Satan threatens you with poverty and orders you
to commit immorality. God promises you His forgive-
ness and bounty.

²·²⁷⁰Whatever you give, or vow to give, God knows it.
But the wrongdoers will have no helpers. ²⁷¹If you
disclose your charity, it is good, but if you con-
ceal it and give it to the poor, it is better for
you. It will atone for some of your bad deeds.

²·²⁷²Whatever charity you give benefits your own soul
when you do it only to seek the face of God. Whatev-
er you give will be repaid to you in full, and you
will not be wronged. ²⁷³Give to the poor who are whol-
ly occupied in Godʼs cause, unable to travel in the
land for work. The unknowing might think they are
rich because of their restraint, but you will recog-
nize them because they donʼt beg persistently. What-
ever good you give, be assured that God knows it.

²·²⁷⁴Those who give of their possessions by night and
by day, privately and publicly, will have their re-
ward with their Lord: they will have no fear, nor
will they grieve. ²⁷⁷Those who believe, do good
works, are steadfast in prayer, and spend in chari-
ty, will have their reward with their Lord: they will
have no fear, nor will they grieve.

²·²⁸²When you contract a debt for a specified term,
write it down. Let the debtor write, and not dimin-
ish what he owes. Bring two witnesses. They must not
refuse when called to testify. Do not disdain to
write down your contract, whether it be small or
large, along with the time it falls due: this is more
just with God, more reliable as evidence, and more
likely to prevent doubt between you. If it be an im-
mediate trade, there is no blame if you donʼt write
it down. Have witnesses present when you trade with
one another.

—

³·³He sent down to you the Book with the truth,
confirming what went before it. He sent down the
Torah and the Gospel ⁴as a guidance for the people.

³·¹⁴Alluring to men is the love of their desires: wom-
en, children, heaping treasures of gold and silver,
fine horses, cattle, and farmland. These are
pleasures of life in this world, but with God is the
best place to return.

³·⁹²You will only attain true piety if you give out
of what you love. Whatever you give, truly, God knows
it.

³·¹³⁷Situations similar to yours have happened be-
fore: travel through the earth, and see how it ended
for the disbelievers.

³·¹⁵⁶Believers, donʼt say of your brothers who trav-
eled or went out to fight, “If they had stayed with
us, they would not have died.” This will become a
source of regret in your hearts.

—

⁴·²Give orphans their property. Donʼt replace their
good things with your bad things, nor consume their
property together with your own. Surely, this is a
great sin.

⁴·³Marry women of your choice, two or three or four.
If you fear that you will not treat them fairly, then
only one. That will help you avoid bias. ⁴Give the
women their dower graciously. If they willingly re-
mit any of it to you, enjoy it with a clear con-
science.

⁴·⁵Do not entrust your property to the weak-minded.
God made it a means of support for you, but feed and
clothe them with it, and speak to them with kind-
ness.

⁴·⁶Test orphans until they reach marriageable age. If
they have sound judgment, release their property to
them. Donʼt consume it wastefully or hastily before
they grow up. If the guardian is wealthy, he should
take no compensation. If he is poor, he should use on-
ly what is reasonable. When you release their proper-
ty to them, bring witnesses.

⁴·⁷Men and women shall each have a share of what
parents and close relatives leave, whether the prop-
erty is small or large. ⁸If other relatives, or
orphans, or poor are present during the division,
then give them something from the estate, and speak
to them with kindness. ⁹Let executors have the same
fear in their minds as if they had left helpless chil-
dren behind. Let them fear God, and speak justly.

⁴·¹⁸Repentance has no effect for those who continue
to do evil until death confronts them and they say,
“Now I repent.”

⁴·¹⁹Believers, you are forbidden to inherit women a-
gainst their will. Donʼt treat your wives harshly.
Live with them in kindness. If you dislike them, it
may be that you dislike something in which God has
placed much good.

⁴·²²Donʼt marry women whom your fathers married,
²³women who are close relatives, your wet nurses,
your milk sisters, your wivesʼ mothers, your
stepdaughters, those whom your sons married, two
sisters at the same time, ²⁴and women already mar-
ried. All other women are lawful to you, provided
that you seek them in marriage, with dower from your
property, desiring marriage not fornication.

⁴·²⁹Believers, donʼt consume one anotherʼs wealth un-
justly, but let there be trade by mutual consent.
Donʼt kill yourselves or one another, for God is mer-
ciful to you.

⁴·³¹If you avoid the great sins which you are forbid-
den, We will remove your minor sins, and admit you
through the entrance of honor. ³²Donʼt covet what God
has bestowed more freely on some than on others. Men
and women receive a share of what they earn.

⁴·³⁶Worship God, and join nothing with Him. Do good
to parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, neighbors,
the companion by your side, and travelers. God does
not like the arrogant, the boastful, ³⁷the stingy;
those who command others to be stingy, hiding the
bounty God has given them; ³⁸those who spend their
wealth to be seen by men, and donʼt believe in God
nor the Last Day. ³⁹What harm would it do them to be-
lieve in God and the Last Day, and to spend out of
what God has provided them? ⁴⁰God wrongs no one in
the least degree. If there is a good deed, He dou-
bles it, and gives a great reward.

⁴·⁵⁸God commands you to return what youʼve been
entrusted to its rightful owner. When you judge be-
tween people, do so with justice. ⁵⁹Believers, obey
God, the Messenger, and those in authority among you.

⁴·⁸⁵Whoever intercedes for a good cause will share in
its reward. Whoever intercedes for an evil cause will
share in its burden.

⁴·⁸⁶When offered a greeting, respond with a better
one, or at least its equal. God takes account of eve-
rything.

⁴·⁹⁵God prefers the believers who strive with their
wealth and lives over those who sit — other than the
disabled. Although He has promised good to all of
them, those who strive receive a greater reward than
those who sit.

⁴·¹⁰⁰Whoever emigrates for Godʼs cause will find on
the earth abundance, and many places of refuge. If he
then dies as a refugee, his reward from God is cer-
tain.

⁴·¹⁰¹When you travel, itʼs no sin to shorten your
prayers, if you fear that disbelievers may attack
you. ¹⁰³When you have completed the prayer, remember
God: standing, sitting, and lying down. Once you are
secure, reestablish regular prayer, for prayer is man-
datory for believers at specific times.

⁴·¹¹⁰One who does evil or wrongs himself, but then
asks God for forgiveness, will find God is forgiving
and merciful. ¹¹²But if one sins then blames an inno-
cent person, he burdens himself with a slander and a
flagrant sin.

⁴·¹²³Anyone who does wrong will be repaid according-
ly and will find no protector or helper besides God.
¹²⁴Any believer, male or female, who does good deeds
will enter heaven, and will not receive the least in-
justice.

⁴·¹²⁹You will never be able to treat your wives with
perfect fairness, however much you may want to, but
donʼt favor one completely so as to leave another
hanging. If you make amends and are conscious of God,
He is forgiving and merciful.

⁴·¹³⁵Believers, steadfastly uphold justice, as
witnesses for God, even if it is against yourselves,
your parents, or your relatives. Whether rich or
poor, God can best protect them both. Donʼt follow
your own desire, lest you swerve from justice. If you
distort or neglect justice, God knows what you do.

⁴·¹⁴⁰When you hear people deny and ridicule Godʼs
messages, do not sit with them until they change
topics. Otherwise you will become like them: God will
gather the hypocrites and disbelievers in hell.

⁴·¹⁴²When hypocrites stand to pray, they stand lazi-
ly, to be seen of men, remembering God only a lit-
tle, ¹⁴³wavering between this and that, belonging to
neither these nor those.

⁴·¹⁴⁸God does not like evil to be mentioned in pub-
lic, except by the one who was wronged. God hears and
knows all. ¹⁴⁹Whether you do good openly or private-
ly, or pardon an evil, God is forgiving and power-
ful.

⁴·¹⁶³Muhammad, weʼve sent you revelation as We did to
Noah and the prophets after him: Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon;
to David We gave the Psalms; ¹⁶⁴to other messengers
Weʼve mentioned before; to others We havenʼt
mentioned; and to Moses God spoke directly.

—

⁵·²Some people shut you out of the Sacred Mosque.
Donʼt let your hatred for them lead you to trans-
gress. Help one another in righteousness and piety,
but donʼt help one another in sin and aggression.
Fear God, for God is severe in punishment.

⁵·⁷Remember Godʼs blessing on you. Fear God, for He
knows all the secrets of your heart. ⁸Believers, be
steadfast in devotion to God, as impartial witnesses.
Donʼt let hatred of others lead you away from jus-
tice. Be just: that is nearer to piety. ⁹God has prom-
ised forgiveness and a great reward to those who be-
lieve and do good works.

⁵·³⁵Believers, fear God, seek ways to come closer to
Him, and strive in His cause that you may prosper.

⁵·³⁸Cut off the hands of thieves as recompense for
what they have done: a deterrent from God. ³⁹But who-
ever repents after his crime, and makes amends, God
will accept his repentance, for God is forgiving and
merciful.

⁵·⁴⁴We revealed the Torah containing guidance and
light. ⁴⁵In it we ordained a life for a life, an eye
for an eye, and similar retribution for wounds. But
if anyone forgoes this out of charity, it is an a-
tonement for himself. Those who do not judge by what
God has revealed are the wrongdoers.

⁵·⁴⁸Muhammad, We revealed to you this Book with the
truth, confirming the scriptures that came before it.
To each of you, We have prescribed a law and a clear
path. Had God wanted it, He would have made you all a
single community, but He wanted to test you in what
He has given you, so race to do good. You will all re-
turn to God, then He will clarify your differences.

⁵·⁵⁷Believers, donʼt take allies who view your reli-
gion with ridicule and amusement.

⁵·⁸⁹God will not punish you for your thoughtless
oaths, only for your deliberate oaths. The atonement
for breaking an oath is to feed ten poor people as
you would feed your own family, or to clothe them, or
to free a slave. If you canʼt afford it, fast for
three days. That is the atonement for broken oaths,
but keep your oaths.

⁵·⁹⁰Believers: intoxicants, gambling, idolatry, and
divination are abominations from Satan. Avoid them so
that you may prosper. ⁹¹Satan only wants to use
intoxicants and gambling to cause enmity and hatred a-
mong you, and to hinder you from remembering God and
prayer. So will you quit?

⁵·¹⁰⁶Believers, when making bequests as death
approaches you, let there be two honest witnesses.

—

⁶·⁷Muhammad, even if We had sent down to you a mes-
sage written on paper, and the disbelievers had
touched it with their hands, they would have said,
“This is nothing but obvious magic!” ⁸They say, “Why
was no angel sent down to him?” Had We sent down an
angel, their judgment would have come at once, with-
out respite. ⁹Even if We had sent an angel, We would
have sent him as a man, adding to their confusion.

⁶·⁴⁸We send the messengers only to give good news and
to warn. Whoever believes and reforms will have no
fear, nor will they grieve. ⁴⁹But suffering afflicts
those who reject our messages, because of their defi-
ant disobedience.

⁶·⁵²Donʼt send away those who call on their Lord morn-
ing and evening, seeking His face. You are not ac-
countable for them, nor they for you. If you turn
them away, you become one of the unjust. ⁵⁴Your Lord
has prescribed for Himself mercy: if any of you does
wrong out of ignorance, but then repents and corrects
himself, He is forgiving and merciful.

⁶·⁷⁰Leave alone those who take play and amusement as
their religion, and are deceived by the life of this
world. Remind them, lest a soul be destroyed for what
it has earned, that it will find no protector or in-
tercessor except God.

⁶·¹⁰⁸Donʼt revile those whom idolaters call upon,
lest they revile God in their spite and ignorance. To
every community We have made its own deeds seem pleas-
ing. In the end they will return to their Lord, and
He will inform them of all they did.

⁶·¹²⁰Avoid sin, both open and secret, for those who
sin will be repaid for what theyʼve done. ¹²¹Eat noth-
ing over which Godʼs name has not been pronounced:
that is disobedience indeed.

⁶·¹⁴¹Donʼt be excessive, for God dislikes the waste-
ful. ¹⁴²Eat what God has provided for you, whether
itʼs livestock for burdens or for meat.

⁶·¹⁵¹Donʼt ascribe any equals with God. Be good to
your parents. Donʼt kill your children for fear of
poverty — We will provide for you and for them. Donʼt
approach shameful deeds, whether open or secret.
Donʼt take the life that God has made sacred, except
by legal right. ¹⁵²Donʼt approach the orphanʼs prop-
erty before he comes of age, except to improve it.
Give full measure and weight with justice; we burden
no one with more than he can bear. When you speak, be
just, even if it concerns a relative. ¹⁵³This is My
straight path, so follow it. Donʼt follow other
paths. They will lead you away from His. He has
commanded you to do this, so that you may be right-
eous.

⁶·¹⁶⁴Every soul is responsible for its own actions,
and no one bears anotherʼs burden. You will all re-
turn to your Lord in the end, and He will clarify
that on which you used to differ.

—

⁷·³Believers, follow the revelation to you from your
Lord, and follow no masters other than Him.

⁷·²⁰⁴When the Qurʼan is recited, pay attention and
listen silently that you may receive mercy. ²⁰⁵In the
mornings and evenings, remember your Lord inwardly,
with humility, reverence, and a quiet voice. Donʼt be
among the heedless. ²⁰⁶Even those who are near your
Lord arenʼt too proud to worship Him: they glorify
Him, and prostrate before Him.

—

⁸·²Believers are those whose hearts tremble with awe
when God is mentioned, whose faith strengthens when
His messages are recited to them, who trust in their
Lord, ³who are steadfast in prayer, and who give from
what We have provided them. ⁴They are the true
believers. They have forgiveness with their Lord, and
generous sustenance.

⁸·²⁰Believers, obey God and His Messenger. Donʼt turn
away from him when you are listening. ²¹Donʼt be like
those who say, “We have heard,” but donʼt actually
listen. ²²Indeed, the worst creatures in Godʼs sight
are the deaf and dumb who donʼt use reason.

⁸·⁴⁷Donʼt be like those who came out of their homes
conceited, showing off, and hindering others from
Godʼs path.

—

⁹·²⁴If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your
wives, your tribes, the wealth you have gained, the
commerce you fear will decline, and the dwellings you
love are dearer to you than God, His Messenger, and
struggle in His cause, then wait until God executes
His command. God does not guide the rebellious.

⁹·³⁴Believers, many rabbis and monks falsely devour
menʼs wealth and divert men from Godʼs path. Tell
those who hoard gold and silver, without giving for
Godʼs cause, that they will receive a painful punish-
ment.

⁹·⁵⁴Only this prevents a gift from being accepted:
they donʼt believe God and His Messenger, they come
to prayer lazily, and they give unwillingly.

⁹·⁶⁰Alms are for the poor, the needy, those who ad-
minister the funds, those whose hearts are to be won
over, to free slaves, to help debtors, for Godʼs
cause, and needy travelers.

⁹·⁷¹The believers protect one another. They enjoin
what is right, forbid what is wrong, are steadfast in
prayer, spend in charity, and obey God and His Mes-
senger. God will have mercy on them.

⁹·⁹¹There is no blame on the weak, the ill, or those
without resources to spend, when they are sincere to
God and His Messenger. There is no reason to re-
proach those who do good. ⁹²There is also no blame on
those who came to you for mounts, and when you said,
“I canʼt find a mount for you,” they turned back,
their eyes overflowing with tears of grief that they
had nothing to spend. ⁹³Only those who request exemp-
tion, despite being rich, are open to blame. They are
content to be with those who stay behind.

—

¹⁰·¹¹If God were to hasten the ill that men have
earned, as they wish to hasten the good, their end
would already be here. ¹²And when trouble touches
man, he cries out to Us whether lying on his side,
sitting, or standing, but when We remove his trou-
ble, he goes on his way as if he had never cried out
to Us.

¹⁰·⁴¹If they donʼt believe you, say, “My deeds for
me, and yours for you. You are not responsible for
what I do, nor I for what you do.”

¹⁰·⁴⁷Every community is sent a messenger. When their
messenger comes, they will be judged with justice,
and will not be wronged.

—

¹¹·⁹If We let man taste mercy, and then withdraw it,
he despairs and is ungrateful. ¹⁰But if We let him
taste mercy after adversity has touched him, he is
sure to say, “Misfortune has left me.” He becomes ex-
ultant and boastful. ¹¹Those who are steadfast and do
righteous deeds donʼt act this way. They will have
forgiveness and a great reward.

¹¹·¹¹²Stay on the right path as you have been
commanded, together

# He sees all that you do.

¹¹·¹¹³Donʼt incline toward nor rely on those who do
wrong. ¹¹⁴Be steadfast in prayer at both ends of the
day and during parts

# of the night. Good deeds drive away evil deeds.

¹¹·¹¹⁵Be steadfast: God wonʼt lose the reward of
those who do

# good.

¹¹·¹¹⁷Your Lord would never destroy communities un-
justly if its

# people act righteously.

¹¹·¹¹⁸If your Lord had wanted, He could have made man-
kind one

# community, but they continue to differ.

¹³·⁴There are neighboring plots in the land:
vineyards, cornfields, and date palms. They are all
watered with the same water, yet We make some better
to eat than others. These are signs for people who
reason.

¹³·¹¹God does not change the condition of a people un-
less they change what is within themselves.

¹³·²²Those who are patient, seeking their Lordʼs
face; who are steadfast in prayer; who spend secret-
ly and openly from what We have provided them; and
who repel evil with good: those will have the reward
of an eternal home.

¹³·²⁶They rejoice in the life of this world, but it
is a fleeting pleasure compared to the hereafter.
²⁷The disbelievers say, “Why hasnʼt his Lord sent
down a sign to him?” Say, “God lets stray whom He
will, and guides to Himself those who turn to Him,
²⁸those who believe, and those whose hearts find rest
in remembering God. ²⁹Joy and a beautiful homecoming
await those who believe and do righteous deeds.)

—

¹⁴·³Those who prefer this world over the hereafter,
and turn others from Godʼs way, making it seem crook-
ed: they are far astray.

¹⁴·⁴We have only sent messengers who speak the lan-
guage of their people, in order to make things clear
for them.

¹⁴·¹⁰The messengers said to them, “Can there be any
doubt about God, the creator of the heavens and
earth? He invites you in order to forgive your sins,
and let you live until the appointed time.” They
said, “Youʼre only men like us. You want to turn us a-
way from what our fathers worshipped. In that case,
bring us clear proof.” ¹¹Their messengers answered,
“True, we are only men like you, but God favors His
servants as He pleases. We canʼt bring you proof un-
less God permits it, so let all believers put their
trust in God.”

—

¹⁵·²Perhaps the disbelievers will wish that they had
submitted to God. ³Let them eat and enjoy. Let false
hope distract them. They will come to know.

¹⁵·¹⁹We have spread out the earth, placed firm
mountains on it, and let everything grow on it in due
balance. ²⁰We have provided sustenance in it for you
and for other creatures.

—

¹⁶·⁵He has created livestock for you. You derive
warmth, food, and other benefits from them. ⁶You find
beauty in them when you bring them home in the eve-
ning, and as you lead them to pasture in the morn-
ing. ⁷They carry your loads to lands that you could
only reach on your own with great hardship. Truly
your Lord is kind and merciful. ⁸He has created hors-
es, mules, and donkeys for you to ride, and as adorn-
ment. He also creates things you know nothing about.

¹⁶·¹⁰He sends down water from the sky. It provides a
drink for you and for the vegetation which feeds your
livestock. ¹¹With it He grows for you crops, olives,
date palms, grapes, and every kind of fruit. These
are signs for those who reflect.

¹⁶·¹⁴He has subjected the sea for you, that you may
eat fresh meat from it, and extract ornaments from it
to wear. You see the ships plowing through its waves
seeking the bounty of God that you may be grateful.
¹⁵He has placed rivers and roads on the earth, so you
may find your way; ¹⁶and landmarks and stars that men
may guide themselves. ¹⁷Is He who creates like one
who doesnʼt create?

¹⁶·³⁶We sent a messenger to every community saying,
“Serve God and avoid false gods.” Among them were
some whom God guided and some who strayed. So travel
through the earth and observe how it ended for the
deniers.

¹⁶·⁶¹If God were to punish men for their wrongdoing,
He would leave no living creature on the earth, but
He gives them respite for an appointed time. When
their time comes, they are unable to delay it or ad-
vance it by a single hour.

¹⁶·⁹⁰God commands justice, doing good, and generosi-
ty towards relatives. He forbids all shameful deeds,
bad conduct, and oppression. He instructs you so that
you may take heed. ⁹¹Fulfill the covenant of God once
you have made it, and donʼt break your oaths. ⁹²Donʼt
be like a woman who unravels the yarn which she has
firmly spun.

¹⁶·⁹³If God wanted, He could have made you all one
people, but He lets some stray and guides others. You
will be accountable for your actions. ⁹⁴Donʼt use
your oaths to deceive one another, lest a foot slip
that was firmly planted. Then you will taste the evil
of hindering someone from Godʼs path, and will suf-
fer great punishment.

¹⁶·⁹⁶What you have will vanish, but what God has will
endure. We will certainly reward the steadfast ac-
cording to the best of their actions. ⁹⁷We will give
a new life, one that is good and pure, to whoever
works righteousness and has faith, whether male or fe-
male.

¹⁶·⁹⁹Satan has no power over those who believe and
trust in their Lord. ¹⁰⁰He only has power over those
who ally with him and who join

# partners with \Allah().

¹⁶·¹¹⁰Your Lord is forgiving and merciful to those
who emigrate

# steadfast.

¹⁶·¹¹¹On the Day when every soul comes to plead for
himself, every

# wronged.

¹⁶·¹¹⁴Eat the good and lawful food which God has pro-
vided for

# you, and be grateful for His favors.

¹⁶·¹¹⁹Your Lord is forgiving and merciful to those
who do wrong out

# of ignorance, but afterwards repent and make amends.

¹⁶·¹²⁵Invite everyone to your Lordʼs path with wis-
dom and beautiful

# knows who has strayed from His path and who is rightly guided.

¹⁶·¹²⁶If you must respond to an attack, respond no
worse than the

# attack, but it is better to show patience.

¹⁶·¹²⁷Be patient, for your patience is from God.
Donʼt grieve

# over them or be distressed by their schemes.

¹⁷·¹⁵Whoever receives guidance does so for his own
benefit. Whoever strays does so to his own detri-
ment. No one will bear anotherʼs burden, but We only
punish after We have sent a messenger.

¹⁷·²⁰We bestow some of our bounty on all. Your Lordʼs
bounty is not closed to anyone. ²¹Notice that We have
bestowed more on some than on others, but the hereaf-
ter holds greater rank and bounty.

¹⁷·²²Donʼt make another deity equal with God or you
will become disgraced and forsaken. ²³Your Lord has
decreed that you worship only Him, and that you be
kind to your parents. Donʼt speak a word of disre-
spect to them, nor scold them, but address them re-
spectfully. ²⁴Say, “My Lord, have mercy on them just
as they reared me when I was small.”

¹⁷·²⁵Your Lord knows what is in your hearts. If you
are righteous, He forgives those who turn to Him a-
gain and again. ²⁶Give what is due to relatives, the
needy, and travelers; but donʼt spend your wealth
wastefully. ²⁷Indeed, the wasteful are brothers of
Satan, and Satan is always ungrateful to his Lord.
²⁸Even if you must turn away from the needy in pur-
suit of mercy from your Lord, then at least speak a
kind word to them.

¹⁷·³¹Donʼt kill your children for fear of poverty. We
will provide for them and for you. Indeed, killing
them is a great sin. ³²Donʼt go near adultery, for it
is shameful and an evil path. ³³Donʼt take life,
which God has made sacred, except in pursuit of jus-
tice. ³⁴Donʼt go near an orphanʼs property, except to
improve it, until he reaches maturity. Fulfill every
commitment, for you will be questioned about your
commitments. ³⁵Give full measure when you measure,
and weigh with honest scales. That is best and advan-
tageous in the end. ³⁶Donʼt concern yourself with
things you know nothing about: you will be questioned
about hearing, seeing, and feeling. ³⁷Donʼt walk on
the earth with arrogance: you canʼt tear the earth a-
part, nor match the mountains in height. ³⁸Your Lord
detests all these actions. ³⁹This is some of the wis-
dom your Lord has revealed to you.

¹⁷·⁵³Say what is best. Satan sows discord among My
servants. He is a clear enemy to man.

¹⁷·⁷⁰We have honored Adamʼs children, carried them on
land and sea, given them good sustenance, and fa-
vored them above much of our creation. ⁷¹One day We
will call together all men along with their leaders.
Whoever is given his record in his right hand will
read it with pleasure, and will not be wronged in the
least. ⁷²But whoever is blind in this world will be
blind in the hereafter and even further astray.

¹⁷·⁷⁸Establish regular prayer from midday until the
darkness of night. Recite the Qurʼan at dawn, for
morning recitation is always witnessed.

¹⁷·¹⁰⁰If you possessed the treasuries of my Lordʼs
mercy, you would

# stingy.

¹⁷·¹¹⁰Call on God, or on the Most Merciful. Whichev-
er name you

# too loudly or too quietly, but seek a middle way.

¹⁸·²³Never say, “Iʼll do that tomorrow,” ²⁴without
adding, “God willing.” When you forget, remember your
Lord and say, “May my Lord guide me closer to the
right path.”

¹⁸·³²There were two men. We gave one of them two
vineyards surrounded by date palms with cornfields in
between. ³³Both vineyards produced fruit, didnʼt
fail, and We caused a river to flow through them,
³⁴so this man had abundant fruit. He said to his
friend, “I have more wealth and men than you.” ³⁵Hav-
ing thus sinned against himself, he went into his gar-
den. He said, “I donʼt think this will ever perish,
³⁶nor that the Hour of Judgment will ever come. Even
if I were brought back to my Lord, I would surely
find something even better than this.)

¹⁸·³⁷His friend said to him, “Do you disbelieve in
Him who created you? ³⁸But as for me, He is God, My
Lord, and I associate no partner with Him. ³⁹When you
entered your garden, why didnʼt you say, “This is
Godʼs will. There is no power but with God.” Al-
though I have less wealth and offspring than you,
⁴⁰my Lord may give me something better than your gar-
den, or a calamity may turn your garden into slipper-
y sand, ⁴¹or its water might sink underground so that
you canʼt reach it.)

¹⁸·⁴²And thus it happened: his fruit was ruined. He
remained, wringing his hands over what he had spent
on it, while it collapsed upon its trellises, say-
ing, “I wish that I had never ascribed partners to my
Lord.” ⁴³He had none to help him other than God, nor
could he help himself.

¹⁸·⁴⁵This worldʼs life is like rain sent down from
the sky. The earthʼs vegetation absorbs it but soon
becomes dry stubble, scattered by the wind. ⁴⁶Wealth
and children adorn this worldʼs life, but enduring
good deeds are better to your Lord, and a better
source of hope.

—

²⁰·²We didnʼt send down the Qurʼan to distress you,
³but only as a reminder for those who fear God.

²⁰·¹⁵Although I keep the hour hidden, the time is com-
ing for each soul to be rewarded for its effort.
¹⁶Donʼt let those who deny it and follow their own
desires distract you from it, lest you perish.

²⁰·⁸¹Eat from the good things We have provided you,
but donʼt transgress, lest My anger descend on you.
⁸²Yet I repeatedly forgive those who repent, be-
lieve, do right, and continue receiving guidance.

—

²²·³⁹Those who have been wrongfully attacked may
fight back. Indeed, God has the power to help ⁴⁰those
who have been unjustly driven from their homes only
for saying, “Our Lord is God”. If God didnʼt repel
one people with another, many monasteries, churches,
synagogues, and mosques would have been destroyed;
places in which the name of God is frequently in-
voked.

²²·⁶⁷We have appointed a different manner of worship
for each community to observe, so donʼt let others ar-
gue with you about the matter. ⁶⁸If they do argue
with you, say, “God knows best what you are doing.”
⁶⁹On Resurrection Day, God will judge the differences
between you.

—

²³·¹The believers are indeed successful: ²those who
pray humbly, ³avoid idle talk, ⁴give alms, ⁵guard
their chastity ⁶(except with their spouses), ⁸who are
attentive to their trusts and promises, ⁹and guard
their prayers. ¹¹These will inherit Paradise and live
there forever.

²³·⁴⁴We sent our messengers one after another. Every
time a communityʼs messenger arrived, they denied
him. So We let them follow each other to destruction
and they became cautionary tales.

²³·⁶⁸Have they never contemplated the word of God?
Has something new come to them that didnʼt come to
their forefathers? ⁶⁹Do they deny their Messenger be-
cause they donʼt recognize him? ⁷⁰Do they say, “He is
possessed”? No, he brought them the truth and most of
them hate it. ⁷¹If truth had followed their desires,
the heavens, the earth, and everything that lives in
them would be ruined. We sent them a reminder, but
they turn away from it.

—

²⁴·²⁷Believers, before entering another personʼs
house, ask permission and greet its occupants. ²⁸E-
ven if no one is in the house, wait until you re-
ceive permission. If you are told, “Go away,” do so.
God is aware of all that you do.

²⁴·³⁰Tell believing men to lower their gaze and guard
their private parts. ³¹Tell believing women to lower
their gaze and guard their private parts, to cover
their breasts, and not to stamp their feet to draw at-
tention to what is hidden.

—

²⁵·⁷They say, “What sort of a messenger is this? He
eats food and walks through the marketplace. Why was-
nʼt an angel sent down to help him warn? ⁸Why hasnʼt
he been given treasure, or a garden to feed him? The
man you follow is simply bewitched.) ⁹Theyʼve gone a-
stray and canʼt find the right path.

²⁵·²⁰Muhammad, all the messengers We sent before you
were also men who ate food and walked through the mar-
ketplace. Weʼve made some people a test for others.
Will you have patience? Your Lord sees everything.

²⁵·²⁷On that Day the wrongdoer will bite his hand and
say, “If only I had taken the same path as the Mes-
senger! ²⁸Woe is me! If only I had not taken so-and-
so as a friend! ²⁹He lead me away from the Reminder
after it came to me. Satan always betrays mankind.)

²⁵·³²Disbelievers say, “Why isnʼt the Qurʼan revealed
to him all at once?” This is to strengthen your
heart. We have revealed it gradually, in stages.

²⁵·⁴⁷He makes the night as clothing for you, sleep as
rest, and the day like a resurrection. ⁴⁸He sends the
winds as messengers of good news before His mercy. We
send down pure water from the sky ⁴⁹to revive a dead
land and as a drink for our creations: animals and
men in great numbers. ⁵⁰We have repeated this many
times among them as a reminder, but most remain un-
grateful.

²⁵·⁵⁶Muhammad, We have only sent you to deliver good
news and a warning. ⁵⁷Say, “The only payment I ask
for it is that whoever wishes takes a path to his
Lord.”

²⁵·⁶³The servants of the Most Gracious are those who
walk humbly on the earth, and when fools address
them, they reply, “Peace;” ⁶⁷those who, when they
spend, are neither extravagant nor stingy, but moder-
ate between those extremes; ⁶⁸those who never invoke
a deity beside God, nor take a life which God has
made sacred, nor commit fornication.

²⁵·⁷⁰God will change evil into good for him who
repents, believes, and does good deeds. God is for-
giving and merciful. ⁷¹Whoever repents and does good
has turned towards God with true repentance.

²⁵·⁷²Servants of God are those who give no false wit-
ness and pass by frivolity with dignity; ⁷³those who
donʼt ignore their Lordʼs messages when reminded of
them; ⁷⁴and those who pray, “Our Lord, give us joy in
our wives and children, and let us be examples to the
righteous.”

—

²⁸·⁵⁰Who is further astray than one who follows his
own desires without guidance from God? Indeed, God
doesnʼt guide wrongdoers. ⁵¹We have conveyed the Word
to them, so they may remember.

²⁸·⁵⁴Those who believe the Scriptures will be
rewarded double, because they are steadfast, repel
evil with good, give out of what We have given them,
⁵⁵and turn away from frivolous speech saying, “We
have our actions and you have yours. Peace be with
you. We donʼt seek association with the ignorant.”
⁵⁶You canʼt guide everyone you love.

²⁸·⁷⁶Qarun had great riches. His people said to him,
“Donʼt gloat, for God doesnʼt like gloaters. ⁷⁷In-
stead, use your wealth to seek the home of the here-
after without forgetting your share in this world. Do
good, as God has been good to you. Donʼt spread cor-
ruption in the land, for God doesnʼt like those who
spread corruption.) ⁷⁹He went out among the people in
his pomp. Those who desired a worldly life said, “If
only we had what Qarun has. He is truly fortunate.”
⁸⁰But those with knowledge said, “Woe to you. Godʼs
reward is better for those who believe and do good.
Only the steadfast will attain it.”

²⁸·⁸⁴Whoever does good will receive something bet-
ter, but whoever does evil will only be punished for
what he has done.

—

²⁹·⁷For those who believe and do good deeds, We will
blot out all their evil and reward them according to
their best deeds.

²⁹·⁸We have commanded man to treat his parents with
kindness, but if they try to make you worship gods be-
side Me, disobey them. You will all return to me, and
Iʼll tell you the truth about everything youʼve done.

²⁹·¹⁰Some men say, “We believe in God,” but when they
suffer for His cause, they consider persecution from
men as if it were Godʼs punishment. If help comes to
you from your Lord, they say, “Weʼve always been with
you.” God knows best what is in everyoneʼs heart.

²⁹·⁴⁵Prayer restrains immoral and unjust behavior.
⁴⁶Donʼt argue with followers of earlier revelation,
but say, “We believe in what was revealed to us and
in what was revealed to you. Our God and your God are
the same. We all bow to Him.”

²⁹·⁵⁷Everyone will taste death, then return to Us.
⁵⁸To them who believe and do good, We will give
mansions to live in forever in a paradise with flow-
ing rivers. The reward is excellent for those who la-
bor, ⁵⁹are steadfast, and trust in their Lord.

—

³⁰·²¹Among His signs is this: He created spouses for
you that you may live in tranquility with them. He
put love and mercy between you. Indeed, there are
signs in this for those who reflect. ²²Among His
signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and the diversity of your languages and your colors.
Indeed, in that are signs for those who know. ²³A-
mong His signs is your sleep, by night and day, and
your quest for some of His bounty.

³⁰·³³When men encounter trouble, they cry to their
Lord and turn to Him for help, but as soon as He
gives them a taste of mercy, some of them worship
gods beside Him, ³⁴showing ingratitude for what We
gave them.

³⁰·³⁶When We give men a taste of mercy, they re-
joice, but when evil afflicts them because of their
own actions, they despair.

³⁰·³⁸Give what is due to relatives, the needy, and
the traveler. That is best for those who seek Godʼs
countenance, and they will prosper. ³⁹Whatever you
lend in usury, to increase through the property of
others, has no increase with God, but whatever you
give in charity, seeking Godʼs countenance, will in-
crease repeatedly.

—

³¹·⁴Those who are steadfast in prayer, spend in char-
ity, and are certain of the hereafter, ⁵are guided by
their Lord and will prosper.

³¹·¹⁴We have commanded man to be good to his parents.
His mother carried him in weakness, and it took two
years to wean him. Be grateful to Me and your
parents. ¹⁵But if they try to make you associate
others with Me, disobey them. Yet accompany them in
this life with kindness, and follow the path of those
who turn to me. You will all return to Me in the end,
and I will tell you the truth about all you did.

³¹·¹⁷Be steadfast in prayer, enjoin what is right,
forbid what is wrong, and patiently bear whatever
happens to you: aspire to these things. ¹⁸Donʼt turn
away from men in pride, nor walk arrogantly through
the earth, for God dislikes the arrogant and boast-
ful. ¹⁹Be moderate in your pace and lower your voice,
for the ugliest sound is the braying of asses.

³¹·³²When waves cover them like a canopy, they call
to God, offering Him sincere devotion. But once He
has safely delivered them to land, some of them wav-
er.

—

³³·³⁵God has prepared forgiveness and a great reward
for those who are devoted to God, for the believers,
the devout, the honest, the steadfast, the humble,
the charitable, those who fast, the chaste, and those
who frequently remember God.

³³·⁵⁴God has full knowledge of everything, whether
you reveal or conceal it.

—

³⁴·³⁴Whenever we send a warner to a community, the
wealthy say, “We donʼt believe in the message you
bring. ³⁵We have more wealth and children than you,
and will not be punished.)

³⁴·³⁷Neither wealth nor children will bring you
nearer to Us: only faith and righteousness.

—

³⁵·⁴⁵If God immediately punished men for their wrong-
doing, He wouldnʼt leave a single creature on the
earth. However, He defers for a stated time.

—

³⁹·⁷If you are ungrateful, God has no need of you. He
dislikes ingratitude in His servants. If you are
grateful, He is pleased with you. No one will bear
anotherʼs burden. You will return to your Lord in the
end, and He will inform you about what you did. He
knows what is in menʼs hearts.

³⁹·¹⁰Those who do good in this world receive a good
reward. The patient will receive a reward without
measure.

³⁹·⁴⁹When man suffers, he cries out to Us, but when
We favor him, he says, “Iʼve received this because of
my own wisdom.” This is only a test, but most donʼt
know it.

³⁹·⁶⁹The earth will shine with the light of its Lord,
the record of deeds will be opened, the prophets and
witnesses will be brought forward, and fair judgment
pronounced between them. They will not be wronged.
⁷⁰Every man will be paid in full for his actions.
⁷¹Disbelievers will be led to Hell in crowds. When
they arrive, its gates will open, and its keepers
will say, “Didnʼt messengers come from among you, re-
citing your Lordʼs messages to you, and warning you a-
bout todayʼs meeting?”

—

⁴⁰·⁵⁵Be patient, for Godʼs promise is true. Ask for-
giveness for your sins, and praise your Lord evening
and morning. ⁵⁶Those who dispute Godʼs messages with-
out authority have hearts full of pride, which they
will never satisfy. Seek refuge in God.

⁴⁰·⁶¹God made the night for you, so that you may
rest. He made the day to help you see. God is bounti-
ful towards men, but most men give no thanks.

—

⁴¹·³³Who speaks better than one who calls men to God,
does what is right, and says, “I submit to God”? ³⁴Re-
pel evil with something better, then your enemy will
become like a close friend. ³⁶If whispers from Satan
stir you up, seek refuge in God.

⁴¹·⁴⁹Man never tires of asking for good things, but
if evil touches him, he gives up all hope and is lost
in despair. ⁵⁰When we let him taste mercy after ad-
versity, he is sure to say, “This is due to my mer-
it. I donʼt think that the Hour will come, but if I
am brought back to my Lord, I will receive the best
reward.” We will inform the disbelievers of every-
thing they did, and make them taste a severe tor-
ment.

—

⁴²·¹³He has established the same religion for you
that He gave to Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: up-
hold the faith, and make no factions therein. ¹⁴They
became divided through jealous animosity among them-
selves. ¹⁵Therefore say, “God is our Lord and your
Lord. Our deeds for us, and your deeds for you. Let
there be no arguments between us. God will bring us
together, and we will return to Him.”

⁴²·²⁷If God were to grant abundant provision to His
servants, they would misbehave; but he sends down in
due measure what He pleases. He knows His servants
and watches over them.

⁴²·³⁶What youʼve been given is for temporary enjoy-
ment in this life. What is with God is better and
more lasting for those who believe and trust in their
Lord; ³⁷avoid great sins and immoralities; forgive, e-
ven when angry; ³⁸respond to their Lord; are stead-
fast in prayer; conduct their affairs by mutual con-
sultation; give from what We have provided them;
³⁹and defend themselves when tyranny afflicts them.

⁴²·⁴⁰The recompense for harm is an equal harm, but
God rewards him who forgives and reconciles. ⁴¹There
is no reason to blame someone who defends himself af-
ter being wronged. ⁴³It requires great determination
to be patient and forgiving.

⁴²·⁴⁸Man rejoices when We let him taste Our mercy,
but he is ungrateful when his own deeds bring misfor-
tune.

—

⁴³·⁶We sent many prophets among earlier people, ⁷but
they mocked each one.

⁴³·²²They said, “Our fathers followed a certain reli-
gion, and we guide ourselves by their footsteps.”
²³In the same way, whenever We sent a messenger to
warn a community, the wealthy ones said, “Our fathers
followed a certain religion, and we will certainly
follow them.”

—

⁴⁵·¹⁴Tell the believers to forgive those who donʼt ex-
pect the Days of God. He alone will repay people for
what they have earned. ¹⁵Whoever does good benefits
himself. Whoever does evil harms himself. You will
all return to your Lord.

—

⁴⁷·²For those who have faith, do good, and believe in
the revelation given to Muhammad, God will remove
their misdeeds and improve their condition.

⁴⁷·³⁶If you believe and fear God, He will give you
your rewards. He doesnʼt ask you to give up all your
possessions. ³⁷If He pressed you for them, you would
begrudge Him, and it would bring out your ill
feelings.

⁴⁷·³⁸Youʼre invited to give towards Godʼs cause, but
some among you are grudging. Whoever withholds, only
withholds from himself. God is free from all wants.
You are the needy ones. If you turn away, Heʼll re-
place you with someone else.

—

⁴⁹·⁶Believers, if a troublemaker brings you news, ver-
ify it, lest you unwittingly harm someone, and later
regret what youʼve done.

⁴⁹·¹¹Believers, one group should not ridicule anoth-
er, who may after all be better than them. Donʼt in-
sult one another. Donʼt use offensive nicknames for
one another. ¹²Avoid making too many assumptions, for
some assumptions are sins. Donʼt spy on or backbite
one another.

—

⁵³·²⁹Avoid those who turn away from Our message and
only desire a worldly life. ³⁰That is the extent of
their knowledge. ³¹Everything in the heavens and on
earth belongs to God. He repays those who do evil, ac-
cording to their deeds, and those who do good, with
what is best. ³²Your Lord is ample in forgiveness to
those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, though
they may commit small sins.

—

⁵⁷·⁷Believe in God and His messenger, and give out of
what you inherit from Him. Those who believe and give
will receive a great reward.  ²⁰This life is like
rain: the growth it causes delights the tillers, but
soon it withers. You see it yellow, then dry and crum-
ble away. Worldly life is only a pleasant illusion.
²¹Race for your Lordʼs forgiveness and for a garden
as wide as heaven and earth, prepared for those who
believe in God and His messengers.

⁵⁷·²³You donʼt need to despair over what eludes you
or gloat over what you receive. For God dislikes
those who are conceited, boastful, ²⁴stingy, and en-
join stinginess on others.

⁵⁷·²⁶We sent Noah and Abraham, and gave prophethood
and scripture to their descendants. Some of them were
rightly guided, but many were transgressors. ²⁷We
sent other messengers in their footsteps. We sent
Jesus the son of Mary, gave him the Gospel, and put
compassion and mercy into the hearts of his
followers. But We did not prescribe monasticism for
them; they invented that themselves. We gave the
believers among them their reward, but many of them
were transgressors.

—

⁶¹·²Believers, why do you say one thing and do anoth-
er? ³It is most hateful in Godʼs sight.

⁶¹·⁷Who does greater wrong than one who invents a lie
against God while he is being invited to Islam?

—

⁶²·⁹Believers, when the call to prayer is proclaimed
on Friday, hurry to Godʼs rememberance, and leave
your commerce. That is best for you if only you knew.
¹⁰When the prayer is finished, disperse throughout
the land, seek Godʼs bounty, and remember Him often,
so that you may prosper.

⁶²·¹¹Muhammad, when they see commerce or amusement,
they rush towards it, and leave you standing. Say,
“What God has is better than any amusement or com-
merce. God is the best provider.”

—

⁶⁸·⁷Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and
who receives guidance, ⁸so donʼt obey the deniers.
¹⁰Donʼt obey a worthless oath-maker, ¹¹a slanderer, a
malicious gossip, ¹²one who hinders good, a
transgressor, sinful, ¹³cruel, a pretender.

—

⁷⁰·¹⁹Man was created anxious. ²⁰Heʼs fretful when mis-
fortune touches him, ²¹and stingy when good fortune
touches him. ²²Except for those devoted to prayer
²³who remain constant in their prayers, ²⁴and who
give a share of their wealth ²⁵to beggars and the de-
prived; ²⁶those who believe in the Day of Judgment;
²⁷those who fear their Lordʼs punishment, ²⁸for none
is safe from it; ²⁹those who guard their chastity,
³⁰except with their wives; ³²those who are attentive
to their trusts and pledges; ³³those who bear wit-
ness honestly; ³⁴those who guard their prayers.
³⁵They will be honored in the Gardens.

—

⁷³·⁷You are busy for much of the day, ⁸but remember
your Lord and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly.
¹¹Let Me deal with the deniers who live in luxury.
Bear with them for a little while.

⁷³·²⁰Recite as much of the Qurʼan as may be easy for
you. He knows that some of you are sick, others trav-
el throughout the land seeking Godʼs bounty, and
others fight in Godʼs cause. Therefore, recite as
much of the Qurʼan as may be easy for you, establish
regular prayer, and spend in charity.

—

⁷⁴·³Glorify your Lord, ⁴purify yourself, ⁵and shun
all filth. ⁶Donʼt bestow favors to receive increase,
⁷but be patient for your Lord.

⁷⁴·¹¹Let Me alone deal with him whom I alone creat-
ed, ¹²to whom I gave vast wealth ¹³and children by
his side, ¹⁴for whom I made life comfortable, ¹⁵yet
he still wants Me to give him more.

⁷⁴·⁴⁰The companions of the right will be in gardens
asking one another ⁴¹about the sinners, ⁴²“What led
you into hell-fire?” ⁴³They will answer, “We neither
prayed ⁴⁴nor fed the poor, ⁴⁵but we indulged in vain
conversation with others ⁴⁶and denied the Day of Judg-
ment ⁴⁷until certainty came upon us.)

⁷⁴·⁴⁹Why do they turn away from admonition ⁵⁰like
frightened donkeys ⁵¹fleeing from a lion?

—

⁷⁶·⁷The righteous fulfill their vows; they fear a day
of widespread evil; ⁸they feed the poor, the orphan,
and the captive, ⁹saying, “We feed you for the sake
of God alone. We seek neither reward nor gratitude
from you.”

⁷⁶·²⁴Patiently await your Lordʼs judgment, and donʼt
obey the sinner or disbeliever. ²⁵Remember your
Lordʼs name morning and evening. ²⁶Bow to Him during
the night, and glorify Him throughout the long night.

—

⁸⁰·¹Muhammad frowned and turned away ²because the
blind man came to him. ³For all you know, he might be-
come pure, ⁴or be reminded of something useful.

—

⁸¹·¹When the sun is wrapped in darkness, ²when the
stars fall, ³when the mountains vanish, ⁸when the ba-
by girl buried alive is asked ⁹for what sin she was
killed, ¹⁰when the pages are laid open, ¹⁴then every
person will know what he has prepared for himself.

—

⁸³·²Woe to those who demand a full measure for them-
selves ³but give to others less than whatʼs due. ⁴Do
they not think that they will be resurrected, ⁶on a
Day when all men will stand before the Lord of the
worlds?

⁸³·²⁹Sinners used to laugh at believers, ³⁰wink at
each other when they passed by, ³¹joke about them
when they returned to their own people, ³²and say,
“These people are truly lost,” ³³but they were not
sent as guardians over them.

—

⁸⁷·⁸We will make the path towards ease easy for you.
⁹So remind others, if a reminder will help them.
¹⁰Those who fear God will receive the reminder, ¹¹but
the wicked will avoid it.

⁸⁷·¹⁴Those will prosper who purify themselves, ¹⁵re-
member the name of their Lord, and pray. ¹⁶Yet you
prefer the life of this world ¹⁷even though the Here-
after is better and more enduring.

—

⁸⁹·¹⁵As for man, when his Lord tries him by giving
him honor and gifts, he says “My Lord has honored
me.” ¹⁶But when He tries him by restricting his pro-
vision, he says, “My Lord has humiliated me.”

—

⁹²·⁴You all strive for diverse goals. ⁵For him who
gives, fears God, ⁶and believes in the best, ⁷We will
smooth his path towards ease. ⁸But for him who is
stingy, considers himself self-sufficient, ⁹and
denies the best, ¹⁰We will smooth his path towards
difficulty, ¹¹and his wealth will not help him when
he falls.

⁹²·¹⁷The righteous will remain far from hell. ¹⁸Those
who spend their wealth on self-purification, ¹⁹not to
return a favor ²⁰but only seeking their Lordʼs face,
²¹will be satisfied.

—

⁹³·⁶Muhammad, did He not find you as an orphan and
shelter you, ⁷find you lost and guide you, ⁸find you
in need and make you rich? ⁹Therefore, donʼt oppress
the orphan, ¹⁰nor repel the beggar, ¹¹but talk about
your Lordʼs blessings.

—

⁹⁶·³Your Lord is the most Bountiful, ⁴who taught by
the pen, ⁵who taught man what he didnʼt know. ⁶But
man transgresses ⁷by considering himself self-
sufficient.

—

¹⁰⁴·¹Woe to every slanderer and backbiter ²who
amasses wealth and continuously counts it, ³thinking
that his wealth will make him immortal.

—

¹⁰⁷·¹Have you considered the man who denies the Judg-
ment? ²He is the one who pushes the orphan away, ³and
doesnʼt encourage the feeding of the poor. ⁴So woe to
those who pray ⁵but are heedless of their prayer;
⁶who only want to be seen, ⁷and withhold small
kindnesses.

—

¹⁰⁹·¹Muhammad, say, “Disbelievers, ²I donʼt worship
what you worship, ³nor do you worship what I wor-
ship. ⁶You have your religion and I have mine.)

