                        Jesus

     An abridgment of the Gospel of Mark focusing
      on the Triple Tradition. Verse references
   such as ²·⁶ indicate the original source of
     the text, but donʼt imply a full quotation.


¹·⁴John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness,
preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgive-
ness of sins. ⁵All the people were going out to him
and were being baptized by him in the river Jordan,
confessing their sins. ⁶John was clothed with camelʼs
hair, wore a leather belt around his waist, and ate
locusts and wild honey.

¹·⁷He preached, saying, “After me comes he who is
mightier than I. Iʼm not worthy to stoop down and un-
tie the strap of his sandals. ⁸I baptized you with wa-
ter, but heʼll baptize you with the holy spirit.”

—

¹·⁹In those days Jesus was baptized by John in the
Jordan. ¹⁰Just as he was coming up out of the water,
he saw the heavens being torn open and the spirit
descending on him like a dove. ¹¹And a voice came out
of the heavens, “You are my beloved son; with you I
am well pleased.”

¹·¹²Immediately the spirit drove him into the wilder-
ness. ¹³He was in the wilderness forty days, being
tempted by the tempter. He was with the wild animals,
and the angels ministered to him.

¹·¹⁴After John was arrested, Jesus came into Gali-
lee, preaching the gospel of God, ¹⁵and saying, “The
time is fulfilled, and Godʼs kingdom is at hand. Re-
pent and believe in the gospel.”

—

¹·¹⁶Walking along by the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon
and Andrew the brother of Simon casting a net into
the sea, for they were fishermen. ¹⁷Jesus said to
them, “Come, follow me, and Iʼll make you become
fishers of men.” ¹⁸Immediately they left the nets,
and followed him.

¹·¹⁹Going on a little farther, he saw James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were in the
boat mending their nets. ²⁰Immediately he called
them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat
with the hired servants, and followed him.

—

¹·²⁹They entered the house of Simon and Andrew, with
James and John.

¹·³⁰Now Simonʼs mother-in-law lay sick with a fever,
and immediately they told him about her. ³¹He came,
took her by the hand, and helped her up. The fever
left her, and she began to wait on them.

¹·³²That evening, after the sun had set, they brought
to him all who were sick and possessed by demons.
³³The whole city gathered together at the door. ³⁴He
healed many who were sick with various diseases, and
cast out many demons. He would not allow the demons
to speak, because they knew him. ³⁹He went into their
synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and cast-
ing out demons.

—

¹·⁴⁰A leper came to him, and kneeling said to him,
“If youʼre willing, you can make me clean.”

¹·⁴¹Moved with compassion, he touched him, and said
to him, “I am willing. Be clean.” ⁴²Immediately the
leprosy left him, and he was cleansed. ⁴³Jesus sent
him away at once and sternly warned him, ⁴⁴“Say noth-
ing to anyone, but go show yourself to the priest and
offer for your cleansing what Moses commanded, as a
testimony to them.”

¹·⁴⁵But he went out and began to talk freely about
it, spreading the news, so that Jesus could no long-
er enter a city publicly, but stayed out in deserted
places, and people came to him from everywhere.

—

²·¹When he returned to Capernaum some days later, peo-
ple heard that he was at home. ²Many were gathered to-
gether, so that there was no more room for them, not
even near the door. He preached the word to them.
³They came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by
four of them. ⁴When they could not come near him be-
cause of the crowd, they removed the roof above him,
made an opening, and let down the mat on which the
paralytic was lying. ⁵When Jesus saw their faith, he
said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiv-
en.”

²·⁶But some of the scribes were sitting there, think-
ing to themselves, ⁷“Why does he talk like that? Heʼs
blaspheming. Who can forgive sins but God alone?”

²·⁸Immediately Jesus perceived in his spirit what
they were thinking, and said to them, “Why do you
question these things in your hearts? ⁹Which is easi-
er, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiv-
en,’ or to say, ‘Rise, pick up your mat, and walk’?
¹⁰But that you may know that the son of man has au-
thority on earth to forgive sins,” he said to the par-
alytic, ¹¹“I tell you, Rise, pick up your mat, and go
home.”

²·¹²He got up, immediately picked up the mat, and
went out in front of them all, so that they were all
amazed, and glorified God, saying, “Weʼve never seen
anything like this.”

—

²·¹³He went out again beside the sea, and all the
crowd came to him, and he taught them. ¹⁴As he passed
by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting in the
tax booth, and said to him, “Follow me.” He got up
and followed him.

²·¹⁵As he reclined at the table in his house, many
tax collectors and sinners reclined with Jesus and
his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
¹⁶The scribes of the Pharisees asked his disciples,
“Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?”

²·¹⁷When Jesus heard it, he said to them, “Those who
are healthy donʼt need a doctor, but those who are
sick. I didnʼt come to call the righteous, but
sinners.”

—

²·¹⁸Some people came and asked him, “Why do Johnʼs
disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast,
but your disciples donʼt fast?”

²·¹⁹Jesus said to them, “Can wedding guests fast
while the groom is with them? As long as they have
the groom with them, they canʼt fast. ²⁰The days will
come, when the groom is taken away from them, and
then they will fast in that day.”

—

²·²³One Sabbath he was going through the grainfields,
and his disciples began to pluck some heads of grain
as they went. ²⁴The Pharisees said to him, “Look. Why
are they doing whatʼs unlawful on the Sabbath?”

²·²⁵He said to them, “Havenʼt you read what David did
when he and his companions were in need and hungry?
²⁶He entered the house of God and ate the consecrat-
ed bread, which is only lawful for the priests to
eat, and he also gave some to his companions.”

²·²⁷He said to them, “The Sabbath was made for man,
not man for the Sabbath.”

—

³·¹He entered the synagogue again, and a man with a
withered hand was there. ²They watched Jesus to see
if he would heal him on the Sabbath, so that they
might accuse him.

³·³He said to the man with the withered hand, “Come
forward.” ⁴He asked them, “Is it lawful on the
Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save life or to
kill?” But they were silent.

³·⁵He looked around at them with anger, grieved at
the hardness of their hearts, and said to the man,
“Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out, and his
hand was restored. ⁶The Pharisees went out and imme-
diately held counsel with the Herodians against him,
how to destroy him.

—

³·⁷Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and
a large crowd followed him. ⁸Hearing the great things
he did, a large crowd came to him.

³·⁹Because of the crowd, he told his disciples to
have a boat wait for him, so they wouldnʼt crush him.
¹⁰Since he had healed so many, everyone who had
diseases pressed around him to touch him. ¹¹Whenever
the unclean spirits saw him, they fell down in front
of him, and cried out, “You are the son of God.”
¹²And he sternly ordered them not to make him known.

—

³·¹³He went up on the mountain and summoned those he
wanted, and they came to him. ¹⁴He appointed twelve,
whom he also named apostles, to be with him, and to
send them out to preach, ¹⁵and to have authority to
cast out demons.

—

³·²²The scribes said, “He casts out demons by the
prince of demons.”

³·²³He called them over to him, and said to them in
parables, “How can the tempter cast out the tempter?
²⁴If a kingdom is divided against itself, that king-
dom cannot stand. ²⁵If a house is divided against it-
self, that house will not be able to stand. ²⁶If the
tempter has risen up against himself, and is divid-
ed, he cannot stand, but is finished. ²⁷No one can en-
ter a strong manʼs house, and plunder his goods, un-
less he first ties up the strong man, and then he can
plunder his house.”

³·²⁸“Truly I say to you, the sons of men will be for-
given all sins and whatever blasphemies they speak,
²⁹but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will
never be forgiven, but is guilty of an eternal sin,”
³⁰because they said, “He has an unclean spirit.”

—

³·³²A crowd was sitting around him, and said to him,
“Your mother and brothers are outside looking for
you.”

³·³³He answered them, “Who are my mother and my
brothers?” ³⁴Looking at those seated around him, he
said, “Here are my mother and my brothers. ³⁵Whoever
does the will of God, he is my brother and sister and
mother.”

—

⁴·¹He began to teach by the sea again. A very great
crowd gathered around him, so he got into a boat on
the sea and sat down. The whole crowd was by the sea
on the land. ²He taught them many things in parables,
and in his teaching said to them, ³“A sower went out
to sow. ⁴As he sowed, some seed fell along the path,
and the birds came and devoured it. ⁵Other seed fell
on rocky ground, where it had little soil. It sprang
up quickly, because it had no depth of soil. ⁶When
the sun rose, it was scorched. Because it had no
root, it withered away. ⁷Other seed fell among
thorns. The thorns grew up, and choked it, and it pro-
duced no grain. ⁸Other seed fell on good soil. It
grew up, increased, and produced grain, bringing
forth thirty, sixty, and a hundredfold. ⁹He who has
ears to hear, let him hear.”

⁴·¹⁰When he was alone, those around him with the
twelve asked him about the parables. ¹⁴He said to
them, “The sower sows the word. ¹⁵These are the ones
along the path, where the word is sown. When they
hear, immediately the tempter comes, and takes away
the word sown in them. ¹⁶These are the ones sown on
rocky ground. When they hear the word, they immedi-
ately receive it with joy, ¹⁷but they have no root in
themselves, and endure briefly. When trouble or per-
secution comes because of the word, they immediately
fall away. ¹⁸These are the ones sown among thorns.
When they hear the word, ¹⁹the worries of the world,
the deceitfulness of riches, and the desire for oth-
er things enter in and choke the word, and it becomes
unfruitful. ²⁰These are the ones sown on good soil.
They hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit: thir-
ty, sixty, and a hundredfold.”

—

⁴·²¹He said to them, “Is a lamp brought in to be put
under a basket, or under a bed, and not on a stand?
²²Nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, and
nothing is secret that will not come to light.”

⁴·²⁴He said to them, “Pay attention to what you hear.
With the measure you use, it will be measured to you,
and even more will be added to you. ²⁵For whoever has
will be given more; and whoever doesnʼt have, even
what he has will be taken away.”

—

⁴·³⁰He said, “With what can we compare Godʼs king-
dom? What parable can we use to describe it? ³¹Itʼs
like a mustard seed. When sown upon the soil, itʼs
smaller than all other seeds on the ground, ³²yet
when itʼs sown, it grows up and becomes larger than
all the garden plants, and puts out large branches,
so the birds of the air can nest in its shade.”

—

⁴·³⁶Leaving the crowd, they took him with them since
he was in the boat; and other boats were with him.
³⁷A great windstorm arose, and the waves were break-
ing over the boat, so that the boat was already fill-
ing up.

⁴·³⁸He was in the stern, sleeping on the cushion.
They woke him up, and said to him, “Teacher, donʼt
you care that weʼre going to die?”

⁴·³⁹He woke up, rebuked the wind, and said to the
sea, “Peace. Be still.” The wind stopped, and there
was a great calm. ⁴⁰He said to them, “Why are you a-
fraid? Do you still have no faith?”

⁴·⁴¹They were terrified, and asked each other, “Who
is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?”

—

⁵·¹They came to the other side of the sea. ²As soon
as Jesus got out of the boat, a man with an unclean
spirit came out of the tombs and met him. ³He lived
in the tombs. No one could bind him anymore, not e-
ven with a chain, ⁴because he had often been bound
with shackles and chains, but had torn the chains a-
part, and broke the shackles in pieces. No one was
strong enough to subdue him. ⁵Night and day, in the
tombs and in the mountains, he was always crying out,
and cutting himself with stones.

⁵·⁶When he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and
knelt down in front of him. ⁷He cried out with a loud
voice, “What do you want with me, Jesus, you son of
the most high God? I beg you by God, not to torment
me.” ⁸For he had said to him, “Come out of the man,
you unclean spirit.”

⁵·¹¹There was a large herd of pigs on the hillside,
feeding. ¹³So he gave the spirits permission to en-
ter the pigs. The unclean spirits came out, and
entered the pigs. The herd of about two thousand
rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned.

⁵·¹⁴The herdsmen fled and told it in the city and the
countryside. People came to see what had happened.
¹⁵They came to Jesus, and saw him who had been pos-
sessed with the demons, sitting, clothed, and in his
right mind; and they were afraid. ¹⁶Those who had
seen it described to them what had happened to the
demon-possessed man and the pigs. ¹⁷They began to beg
Jesus to leave their region.

⁵·¹⁸As he was entering the boat, the man who had been
possessed with demons begged to go with him. ¹⁹He did
not let him, but said to him, “Go home to your own
people, and tell them how much the Lord has done for
you, and how he had mercy on you.” ²⁰He went away and
began to proclaim how much Jesus had done for him.
Everyone was amazed.

—

⁵·²¹When Jesus had crossed again by boat to the oth-
er side, a large crowd gathered around him, and he
was by the sea. ²²One of the synagogue leaders, named
Jairus, came. Seeing Jesus, he fell at his feet,
²³begging him earnestly, “My little daughter is dy-
ing. Come and lay your hands on her, so that she will
get well, and live.”

⁵·²⁴He went with him. A large crowd followed him, and
pressed around him. ²⁵A woman, bleeding for twelve
years, ²⁶had suffered much under many doctors, and
had spent all she had, and was no better, but rather
grew worse. ²⁷Having heard about Jesus, she came up
behind him in the crowd, and touched his cloak. ²⁸For
she said, “If I can just touch his clothes, Iʼll get
well.” ²⁹Immediately, the flow of blood dried up. She
felt in her body that she was healed of her afflic-
tion.

⁵·³⁰Jesus realized at once that power had gone out
from him, and turned around in the crowd, and said,
“Who touched my clothes?”

⁵·³¹His disciples said to him, “You see the crowd
pressing around you, and yet you ask, ‘Who touched
me?’”

⁵·³²He looked around to see who had done it. ³³The
woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had
happened to her, came and fell down in front of him,
and told him the whole truth. ³⁴He said to her,
“Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace,
and be healed of your affliction.”

⁵·³⁵While he was still speaking, people came from
Jairusʼs house and said, “Your daughter is dead. Why
bother the teacher anymore?”

⁵·³⁶Jesus overheard what they said, and told Jairus,
“Donʼt be afraid, just believe.”

⁵·³⁷He allowed no one to follow him except Peter,
James, and John. ³⁸When they came to Jairusʼs house,
he saw a commotion, and people weeping and wailing
loudly. ³⁹He went inside, and asked them, “Why are
you making a commotion, and weeping? The child isnʼt
dead but asleep.”

⁵·⁴⁰They laughed at him, but he sent them all out-
side. He took the childʼs father and mother and those
who were with him, and went in to where the child
was. ⁴¹Taking her by the hand, he said to her, “Lit-
tle girl, I say to you, get up.” ⁴²Immediately the
girl got up and began walking. They were completely a-
mazed. ⁴³He gave them strict orders that no one
should know about this, and told them to give her
something to eat.

—

⁶·¹He left there, and went to his hometown, and his
disciples followed him. ²When the Sabbath came, he be-
gan to teach in the synagogue. Many who heard him
were astonished, saying, “Where did this man get
these things? What is this wisdom given to him? How
are such miracles done by his hands? ³Isnʼt this the
carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and
Joses, and Judas, and Simon? Arenʼt his sisters here
with us?” And they took offense at him.

⁶·⁴Jesus said to them, “A prophet is without honor on-
ly in his hometown, among his relatives, and in his
own household.” ⁵He could do no miracle there, ex-
cept to lay his hands on a few sick people, and heal
them. ⁶He was amazed at their unbelief.

—

⁶·⁶He went around the villages teaching. ⁷He summoned
the twelve, and began to send them out in pairs. He
gave them authority over unclean spirits. ⁸He
instructed them to take nothing for their journey ex-
cept a staff: no bread, no bag, no money in their
belts; ⁹but to wear sandals and not a second shirt.

⁶·¹²They went out, and preached that people should re-
pent. ¹³They cast out many demons, anointed many sick
people with oil, and healed them.

—

⁶·¹⁴King Herod heard about this because Jesusʼs name
had become well known. ¹⁶When Herod heard it, he
said, “John, whom I beheaded, has risen.” ¹⁷For Her-
od had married Herodias, his brotherʼs wife. He had
ordered John to be arrested and bound in prison for
her sake. ¹⁸For John had been telling Herod, “Itʼs
not lawful for you to have your brotherʼs wife.” ¹⁹So
Herodias had a grudge against him, and wanted to kill
him. But she could not, ²⁰because Herod feared John,
and kept him safe, knowing that he was a righteous
and holy man. When he heard him, he was greatly per-
plexed, yet he enjoyed listening to him.

⁶·²¹An opportunity came on Herodʼs birthday. He
hosted a banquet for his nobles, the military
commanders, and the leading men of Galilee. ²²When
Herodiasʼs daughter came in and danced, she pleased
Herod and his guests. The king said to the girl, “Ask
me for whatever you want, and Iʼll give it to you.”

⁶·²⁵She said, “I want you to give me John the
Baptistʼs head on a platter right now.”

⁶·²⁶The king was greatly distressed, but because of
his vow and his guests he did not want to refuse her.
²⁷Immediately the king sent an executioner who went
and beheaded him in the prison, ²⁸brought his head on
a platter, and gave it to the girl, and the girl gave
it to her mother.

⁶·²⁹When his disciples heard about it, they came and
took his body, and laid it in a tomb.

—

⁶·³²They went away in the boat by themselves to a de-
serted place. ³³Many saw them going and recognized
them, and ran on foot from all the towns and arrived
ahead of them. ³⁴When he went ashore, he saw a large
crowd, and had compassion on them, because they were
like sheep without a shepherd. He began to teach them
many things.

⁶·³⁵When it grew late, his disciples came to him, and
said, “This is a desolate place, and itʼs getting
late. ³⁶Send them away to go into the surrounding
countryside and villages to buy themselves something
to eat.”

⁶·³⁷He answered, “You give them something to eat.”
They asked him, “Should we go and buy two hundred de-
narii worth of bread, and give it to them to eat?”

⁶·³⁸He said, “How many loaves do you have? Go and
see.” Once they had found out, they said, “Five, and
two fish.”

⁶·³⁹He commanded them all to sit down in groups on
the green grass. ⁴⁰They sat down in groups of
hundreds and fifties.

⁶·⁴¹He took the five loaves and the two fish. Looking
up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves. He
gave them to his disciples to set before the people,
and divided the two fish among them all. ⁴²Everyone
ate and was satisfied. ⁴³They picked up twelve
baskets full of broken pieces and of fish. ⁴⁴There
were five thousand men who ate the loaves.

—

⁷·¹The Pharisees, and some of the scribes who had
come from Jerusalem, gathered around him, ²and saw
some of his disciples eating their bread with un-
washed hands. ³The Pharisees only eat if they have
carefully washed their hands, keeping the tradition
of the elders. ⁴When they come from the marketplace,
they only eat after they have washed. They keep many
other traditions such as the washing of cups,
pitchers, copper pots, and dining couches.

⁷·⁵The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, “Why
donʼt your disciples keep the tradition of the
elders? Instead, they eat with unwashed hands.”

⁷·⁶He replied, “Isaiah prophesied correctly about you
hypocrites, as it is written: ‘This people honors me
with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
⁷They worship me in vain, teaching as doctrines the
commandments of men.’ ⁸Neglecting the commandment of
God, you hold on to the tradition of men. ⁹You have a
fine way of rejecting the commandment of God in or-
der to keep your tradition. ¹³The tradition that you
have handed down nullifies the word of God. You do
many things like that.”

⁷·¹⁴He summoned the crowd again, and said to them,
“Everyone listen to me and understand: ¹⁵Nothing that
enters a person from outside can defile him, but the
things that come out of a person are what defile
him.”

⁷·¹⁷When he entered the house away from the crowd,
his disciples asked him about the parable. ¹⁸He said
to them, “Are you also without understanding? Do you
not see that whatever goes into a person from out-
side cannot defile him, ¹⁹because it doesnʼt go into
his heart, but into his stomach and is eliminated?”
Thus he declared all foods clean.

⁷·²⁰He said, “What comes out of a person is what
defiles him. ²¹For from within, out of a personʼs
heart, come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft,
murder, adultery, ²²coveting, wickedness, deceit, sen-
suality, envy, slander, pride, foolishness. ²³All
these evil things proceed from within, and defile a
person.”

—

⁸·¹¹The Pharisees came and began to argue with him,
demanding of him a sign from heaven to test him. ¹²He
sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, “Why does this
generation demand a sign? No sign will be given to
this generation.” ¹³He left them, got back into the
boat, and went to the other side.

—

⁸·²⁷Jesus and his disciples went to the villages of
Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples,
“Who do people say that I am?”

⁸·²⁸They told him, “John the Baptist; others say
Elijah; but others, one of the prophets.”

⁸·²⁹He asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Pe-
ter answered, “You are the Christ.”

⁸·³⁰He warned them to tell no one about him.

—

⁸·³¹He began to teach them that the son of man must
suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders,
chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after
three days rise again. ³²He spoke openly about this.
Peter took him aside, and began to rebuke him.

⁸·³³Turning and seeing his disciples, he rebuked Pe-
ter, and said, “Get behind me, Tempter. For youʼre
not thinking about the things of God, but the things
of man.”

⁸·³⁴He summoned the crowd with his disciples, and
said to them, “If anyone wants to come after me, let
him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me.
³⁵For whoever wants to save his life will lose it,
but whoever loses his life for my sake and the
gospelʼs will save it. ³⁶What does it profit a man to
gain the whole world, and forfeit his soul? ³⁷What
can a man give in exchange for his soul? ³⁸Whoever is
ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sin-
ful generation, the son of man will also be ashamed
of him when he comes in his fatherʼs glory with the
holy angels.”

—

⁹·²After six days Jesus took Peter, James, and John
with him, and led them up a high mountain by them-
selves. He was transfigured in front of them, ³and
his clothes became radiant, intensely white, as no
one on earth could whiten them. ⁴Elijah and Moses
appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.

⁹·⁷A cloud overshadowed them, and a voice from the
cloud said, “This is my beloved son. Listen to him.”
⁸Suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone
with them except Jesus.

⁹·⁹As they were coming down the mountain, he ordered
them to tell no one what they had seen, until the son
of man had risen from the dead. ¹⁰They kept it to
themselves, discussing what it meant to rise from the
dead.

—

⁹·¹⁴When they came to the disciples, they saw a large
crowd around them, and scribes arguing with them.
¹⁵As soon as the crowd saw him, they were amazed, and
ran to greet him. ¹⁶He asked them, “What are you ar-
guing with them about?”

⁹·¹⁷Someone in the crowd answered him, “Teacher, I
brought my son to you. He has a spirit that makes him
mute. ¹⁸Whenever it seizes him, it throws him down.
He foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes
rigid. I asked your disciples to cast it out, but
they couldnʼt.”

⁹·¹⁹He answered them, “You unbelieving generation,
how long will I be with you? How long will I put up
with you? Bring him to me.”

⁹·²⁰They brought the boy to him. When the spirit saw
him, it immediately threw the boy into a convulsion.
He fell to the ground, and rolled around, foaming at
the mouth.

⁹·²¹Jesus asked his father, “How long has this been
happening to him?” And he said, “From childhood. ²²It
has often thrown him into fire or water to destroy
him. If you can do anything, have compassion on us,
and help us.”

⁹·²³Jesus said to him, “‘If you can?’ Everything is
possible for one who believes.”

⁹·²⁴Immediately the boyʼs father cried out, “I do be-
lieve. Help my unbelief.”

⁹·²⁵When Jesus saw that a crowd was rapidly gather-
ing, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it,
“You mute and deaf spirit, I command you: come out of
him and never enter him again.”

⁹·²⁶After crying out, and throwing him into terrible
convulsions, it came out. The boy was like a corpse,
so that most of them said, “Heʼs dead.” ²⁷But Jesus
took him by the hand, and lifted him up, and he got
up.

⁹·²⁸After he entered the house, his disciples asked
him privately, “Why couldnʼt we cast it out?”

⁹·²⁹He said to them, “This kind only comes out by
prayer.”

—

⁹·³⁰They left that place, and passed through Gali-
lee. He did not want anyone to know, ³¹because he was
teaching his disciples, saying to them, “The son of
man will be delivered into the hands of men, and they
will kill him. After heʼs killed, heʼll rise three
days later.” ³²But they did not understand this state-
ment, and were afraid to ask him.

—

⁹·³³They came to Capernaum. He asked them, “What were
you discussing on the way?” ³⁴But they were silent,
because they had been arguing about which of them was
the greatest. ³⁵He sat down, called the twelve, and
said to them, “If anyone wants to be first, he must
be last of all, and servant of all.”

⁹·³⁶He took a child, and had him stand among them.
Taking him in his arms, he said to them, ³⁷“Whoever
welcomes one child like this in my name welcomes me.
Whoever welcomes me, doesnʼt welcome me, but him that
sent me.”

—

⁹·³⁸John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone cast-
ing out demons in your name, and we tried to stop
him, because he didnʼt follow us.”

⁹·³⁹But Jesus said, “Donʼt stop him. No one can do a
miracle in my name, then soon afterward speak evil of
me. ⁴⁰Whoever is not against us is for us. ⁴¹Truly I
tell you, whoever gives you a cup of water to drink,
because you are Christʼs, will never lose his re-
ward.”

⁹·⁴²“Whoever causes one of these little ones who be-
lieve in me to stumble, it would be better for him if
a heavy millstone were hung around his neck, and he
were thrown into the sea. ⁴³If your hand causes you
to stumble, cut it off. Itʼs better for you to enter
life crippled than to go to hell with two hands. ⁴⁵If
your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off. Itʼs bet-
ter for you to enter life lame than to be thrown in-
to hell with two feet. ⁴⁷If your eye causes you to
stumble, tear it out. Itʼs better for you to enter
Godʼs kingdom with one eye than to be thrown into
hell with two eyes.”

⁹·⁴⁹“For everyone will be salted with fire. ⁵⁰Salt is
good, but if the salt becomes unsalty, how will you
make it salty again? Have salt in yourselves, and be
at peace with one another.”

—

¹⁰·¹He left there and went into the region of Judea
and beyond the Jordan. Crowds gathered around him a-
gain. Again he taught them, as was his custom.

¹⁰·²Pharisees came to him. Testing him, they asked,
“Is it lawful for a man to divorce a wife?”

¹⁰·³He answered them, “What did Moses command you?”

¹⁰·⁴They said, “Moses allowed a man to ‘write a cer-
tificate of divorce, and send her away.’”

¹⁰·⁵But Jesus said to them, “He wrote you this com-
mandment because of your hard hearts. ⁶But from the
beginning of creation, ‘God made them male and fe-
male.’ ⁷‘Therefore a man will leave his father and
mother, ⁸and the two will become one flesh.’ So they
are no longer two, but one flesh. ⁹Therefore what God
has joined together, let no one separate.”

¹⁰·¹⁰In the house the disciples asked him about this
again. ¹¹He said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife,
and marries another, commits adultery against her.
¹²If she divorces her husband, and marries another,
she commits adultery.”

—

¹⁰·¹³People were bringing children to him, so that he
might touch them, but the disciples rebuked them.
¹⁴When Jesus saw it, he was indignant, and said to
them, “Let the children come to me. Donʼt hinder
them, for Godʼs kingdom belongs to such as these.
¹⁵Truly I tell you, whoever does not receive Godʼs
kingdom like a child, will never enter it.” ¹⁶He took
them in his arms, laid his hands on them, and bless-
ed them.

—

¹⁰·¹⁷As he was setting out on his journey, a man ran
up to him, knelt in front of him, and asked him,
“Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal
life?”

¹⁰·¹⁸Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No
one is good except God alone. ¹⁹You know the
commandments: ‘Do not murder, Do not commit adulter-
y, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not de-
fraud, Honor your father and mother.’”

¹⁰·²⁰He said to him, “Iʼve kept all these from my
youth.”

¹⁰·²¹Looking at him, Jesus loved him, and said to
him, “You lack one thing: go, sell all you have, give
to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven.
Then come, follow me.”

¹⁰·²²But he was saddened by these words, and he went
away grieving, for he had many possessions.

¹⁰·²³Jesus looked around, and said to his disciples,
“How hard it will be for those who have wealth to en-
ter Godʼs kingdom.” ²⁴The disciples were amazed at
his words. But Jesus said to them again, “Children,
how hard it is to enter Godʼs kingdom. ²⁵Itʼs easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than
for a rich person to enter Godʼs kingdom.”

¹⁰·²⁶They were even more astonished, and asked him,
“Then who can be saved?”

¹⁰·²⁷Looking at them, Jesus said, “With man itʼs im-
possible, but not with God. Because all things are
possible with God.”

¹⁰·²⁸Peter began to tell him, “Weʼve left every-
thing, and followed you.”

¹⁰·²⁹Jesus said, “Anyone who has left house or
brothers or sisters or mother or father or children
or fields, for my sake, and for the gospel, ³⁰will re-
ceive a hundredfold now in this time, houses and
brothers and sisters and mothers and children and
fields, with persecutions, and eternal life in the
age to come. ³¹But many who are first will be last,
and the last first.”

—

¹⁰·³²They were on the road, going up to Jerusalem,
and Jesus was walking ahead of them. He took the
twelve again, and began to tell them what was going
to happen to him, ³³“Weʼre going up to Jerusalem, and
the son of man will be delivered to the chief priests
and the scribes. Theyʼll condemn him to death, and de-
liver him to the Gentiles. ³⁴Theyʼll mock him, spit
on him, scourge him, and kill him. Heʼll rise after
three days.”

—

¹⁰·⁴²Jesus called them over, and said to them, “You
know that those who are considered rulers of the
Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones ex-
ercise authority over them. ⁴³But it is not this way
among you. Instead, whoever wants to become great a-
mong you must be your servant, ⁴⁴and whoever wants to
be first among you must be slave of all. ⁴⁵For even
the son of man didnʼt come to be served, but to
serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”

—

¹⁰·⁴⁶As he was leaving Jericho with his disciples and
a large crowd, a blind beggar was sitting by the
road. ⁴⁷When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth,
he began to cry out, “Jesus, son of David, have mer-
cy on me.”

¹⁰·⁴⁸Many sternly told him to be silent, but he cried
out even louder, “Son of David, have mercy on me.”

¹⁰·⁴⁹Jesus stopped and said, “Call him.” They called
the blind man, saying to him, “Take courage. Get up.
Heʼs calling for you.” ⁵⁰Throwing aside his cloak, he
jumped up, and came to Jesus.

¹⁰·⁵¹Jesus asked him, “What do you want me to do for
you?” The blind man said to him, “Rabbi, I want to re-
gain my sight.”

¹⁰·⁵²Jesus said to him, “Go, your faith has made you
well.” Immediately he regained his sight, and began
following him on the road.

—

¹¹·¹As they approached Jerusalem, near the Mount of
Olives, he sent two of his disciples, ²and told them,
“Go into the village ahead of you. As soon as you en-
ter it, youʼll find a colt tied, on which no one has
ever sat. Untie it, and bring it. ³If anyone asks
you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs
it and will send it back immediately.’”

¹¹·⁴They went, found a colt outside in the street
tied by a door, and untied it. ⁵Some of the
bystanders asked them, “Why are you untying the
colt?” ⁶They told them what Jesus had said, and they
gave them permission. ⁷They brought the colt to
Jesus, and put their coats on it. He sat on it, ¹¹and
went into Jerusalem, and into the temple. After
looking around at everything, he left for Bethany
with the twelve, since it was already late.

—

¹¹·¹⁵They came to Jerusalem. He entered the temple,
and began to drive out those buying and selling in
the temple, and overturned the tables of the money
changers and the seats of those selling doves. ¹⁶He
would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through
the temple. ¹⁷He taught, and said to them, “Isnʼt it
written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer
for all the nations’? But you have made it ‘a den of
robbers.’”

—

¹¹·²⁷As he was walking in the temple, the chief
priests, the scribes, and the elders came to him.
²⁸They asked him, “By what authority are you doing
these things?”

¹¹·²⁹Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one ques-
tion. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authori-
ty I do these things. ³⁰Was Johnʼs baptism from heav-
en or from men?”

¹¹·³¹They discussed it with one another, saying, “If
we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Then why didnʼt
you believe him?’ ³²But should we say, ‘From men’?”
They feared the people, for everyone thought that
John really was a prophet.

¹¹·³³They answered Jesus, “We donʼt know.” Jesus said
to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I
do these things.”

—

¹²·¹He began to speak to them in parables. “A man
planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a pit
for a winepress, and built a tower. Then he leased it
to tenants, and went on a journey. ²At harvest time,
he sent a servant to the tenants to collect some of
the fruit of the vineyard from them. ³They took him,
beat him, and sent him away empty-handed. ⁴Again he
sent them another servant. They hit him on the head,
and treated him shamefully. ⁵He sent another, and
they killed that one. He sent many others; they beat
some, and killed others. ⁶He had one more to send, a
beloved son. Finally he sent him to them, saying,
‘They will respect my son.’”

¹²·⁷“But those tenants said to one another, ‘This is
the heir. Come, letʼs kill him, and the inheritance
will be ours.’ ⁸They took him, killed him, and threw
him out of the vineyard.”

¹²·⁹“What will the vineyardʼs owner do? He will come
and destroy the tenants, and give the vineyard to
others. ¹⁰Havenʼt you read this scripture: ‘The stone
that the builders rejected has become the corner-
stone.’”

¹²·¹²They were seeking to arrest him, because they un-
derstood that he spoke the parable against them, but
they feared the crowd. So they left him, and went a-
way.

—

¹²·¹³They sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to
him, so that they might trap him in his words. ¹⁴When
they came, they said to him, “Teacher, we know that
youʼre truthful. You donʼt care what anyone thinks,
because youʼre impartial. You truthfully teach the
way of God. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or
not?” ¹⁵Knowing their hypocrisy, he said to them,
“Why are you testing me? Bring me a denarius to look
at.”

¹²·¹⁶They brought one. He asked them, “Whose image
and inscription is this?” They answered, “Caesarʼs.”
¹⁷Jesus said to them, “Give to Caesar the things that
are Caesarʼs, and to God the things that are Godʼs.”
They marveled at him.

—

¹²·¹⁸Some Sadducees, who say there is no resurrec-
tion, came to Jesus and asked him, ¹⁹“Teacher, Moses
wrote for us that if a manʼs brother dies, and leaves
behind a wife but no child, that his brother must mar-
ry the widow, and raise up children for his brother.
²⁰There were seven brothers. The first one took a
wife, and died without children. ²¹The second one mar-
ried her, and died without children. ²²None of the
seven left children. Last of all, the woman died too.
²³In the resurrection, when they rise, whose wife
will she be? For all seven had married her.”

¹²·²⁴Jesus said to them, “Isnʼt this the reason you
are mistaken: you donʼt know the scriptures or the
power of God? ²⁵For when the dead rise, they neither
marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels
in heaven.”

¹²·²⁶“As for the dead being raised, havenʼt you read
in the book of Moses, in the passage about the burn-
ing bush, how God said to him, ‘I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
²⁷He isnʼt God of the dead, but of the living. Youʼre
greatly mistaken.”

¹²·²⁸One of the scribes came, and heard them argu-
ing. Seeing that he answered them well, he asked him,
“Which commandment is the most important?”

¹²·²⁹Jesus answered, “The most important is, ³⁰‘Love
the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind,
and strength.’ ³¹The second is this, ‘Love your neigh-
bor as yourself.’ There is no commandment greater
than these.”

¹²·³²The scribe said to him, “You stated correctly
that ³³to love him with all the heart, understand-
ing, and strength, and to love oneʼs neighbor as him-
self, is more important than all burnt offerings and
sacrifices.”

¹²·³⁴When Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said
to him, “You arenʼt far from Godʼs kingdom.” After
that, no one dared to ask him any more questions.

—

¹²·³⁸In his teaching he said, “Beware of the scribes,
who like walking around in long robes, being greeted
in the marketplaces, ³⁹the best seats in the
synagogues, and places of honor at banquets. ⁴⁰They
devour widowsʼ houses, and offer long prayers for
show. They will receive greater condemnation.”

—

¹³·¹As he came out of the temple, one of his
disciples said to him, “Teacher, look at these won-
derful stones and buildings!”

¹³·²Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great
buildings? Not one stone will be left upon another;
all will be thrown down.”

¹³·³As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the tem-
ple, Peter, James, John and Andrew asked him private-
ly, ⁴“When will these things happen? What will be the
sign that they are about to be fulfilled?”

¹³·⁵Jesus said to them, “See that no one leads you a-
stray. ⁶Many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he,’
and will mislead many. ¹²Brother will betray brother
to death, and a father his child. Children will rise
against parents, and have them put to death. ¹³Every-
one will hate you because of my name, but he who
endures to the end will be saved.”

¹³·³¹“Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words
wonʼt pass away. ³²No one knows about that day or
that hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the
son, but only the father. ³³Be on guard. Be alert.
For you donʼt know when the time will come.”

¹³·³⁴“Itʼs like a man on a journey: when he leaves
home, he puts his servants in charge, each with a
task, and commands the doorkeeper to be alert.
³⁵Therefore be alert. You donʼt know when the master
of the house will come. It could be in the evening,
at midnight, when the rooster crows, or in the morn-
ing. ³⁶Otherwise, he may come suddenly and find you a-
sleep. ³⁷What I say to you, I say to everyone: Be a-
lert.”

—

¹⁴·¹The Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread
were now two days away. The chief priests and the
scribes sought a way to arrest him by stealth, and
kill him. ²But they said, “Not during the feast, oth-
erwise the people might riot.”

¹⁴·³While he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the
leper, and reclining at the table, a woman came with
an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume. She broke
the jar, and poured it over his head. ⁴Some expressed
indignation to one another, saying, “Why has this per-
fume been wasted? ⁵This perfume might have been sold
for more than three hundred denarii, and the money
given to the poor.” And they scolded her.

¹⁴·⁶Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why are you
bothering her? Sheʼs done a beautiful thing for me.
⁷You always have the poor with you. Whenever you
want, you can do good for them, but you wonʼt always
have me. ⁸She has done what she could. She has
anointed my body beforehand for the burial. ⁹Truly I
tell you, wherever the gospel is preached in the
whole world, what she has done will be told in memo-
ry of her.”

¹⁴·¹⁰Then Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to
the chief priests to betray him to them. ¹¹They were
glad when they heard this, and promised to give him
money. He began looking for an opportunity to betray
him.

—

¹⁴·¹²On the first day of Unleavened Bread, when the
Passover lamb was being sacrificed, his disciples
asked him, “Where do you want us to go to prepare for
you to eat the Passover?”

¹⁴·¹³He sent two of his disciples, and told them, “Go
into the city. A man carrying a pitcher of water will
meet you. Follow him. ¹⁴Wherever he enters, say to
the owner of the house, ‘The teacher says, Where is
my guest room, where I may eat the passover with my
disciples?’ ¹⁵He will show you a large upper room
furnished and ready. Prepare for us there.” ¹⁶The
disciples went out, entered the city, and found it
just as he had told them. They prepared the Passover.

¹⁴·¹⁷When it was evening, he arrived with the twelve.
¹⁸While they were reclining at table and eating,
Jesus said, “Truly I tell you, one of you will be-
tray me, one who is eating with me.”

¹⁴·¹⁹They began to be grieved, and to say to him one
by one, “Surely not I?”

¹⁴·²⁰He said to them, “Itʼs one of the twelve, one
who is dipping bread into the bowl with me. ²¹For the
son of man goes as it is written of him, but woe to
that man by whom the son of man is betrayed! It would
have been better for that man if he had not been
born.”

¹⁴·²²As they were eating, he took bread, blessed it,
broke it, gave it to them, and said, “Take it. This
is my body.” ²³He took a cup, and after giving
thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank from
it. ²⁴He said to them, “This is my blood of the cove-
nant, which is poured out for many. ²⁵Truly I tell
you, I wonʼt drink of the fruit of the vine again un-
til that day when I drink it new in Godʼs kingdom.”

¹⁴·²⁶After singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount
of Olives.

—

¹⁴·²⁷Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away, be-
cause it is written, ‘I will strike down the shep-
herd, and the sheep will be scattered.’ ²⁸But after
Iʼm raised up, Iʼll go ahead of you to Galilee.”

¹⁴·²⁹Peter said to him, “Even if everyone falls a-
way, I wonʼt.”

¹⁴·³⁰Jesus said to him, “Truly I tell you, that this
very night, before a rooster crows twice, you will de-
ny me three times.”

¹⁴·³¹But he kept insisting, “If I have to die with
you, I wonʼt deny you.” They all said the same thing.

—

¹⁴·³²They went to a place called Gethsemane. He told
his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.” ³³He took Pe-
ter, James and John with him, and began to be very
distressed and troubled. ³⁴He told them, “My soul is
deeply grieved to the point of death. Stay here, and
keep watch.”

¹⁴·³⁵He went a little farther, fell to the ground,
and prayed that the hour might pass from him. ³⁶He
said, “Father, everything is possible for you. Re-
move this cup from me. Yet not what I will, but what
you will.”

¹⁴·³⁷He came, found them sleeping, and said to Pe-
ter, “Simon, are you asleep? Couldnʼt you keep watch
for one hour? ³⁸Keep watch and pray, that you wonʼt
come into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.”

¹⁴·³⁹Again he went away, and prayed, saying the same
words. ⁴⁰Again he came, and found them sleeping, be-
cause their eyes were very heavy. They didnʼt know
what to say to him.

¹⁴·⁴¹He came the third time, and said to them, “Are
you still sleeping and resting? Itʼs enough. The time
has come. See, the son of man is being betrayed into
the hands of sinners. ⁴²Get up. Letʼs go. See, my be-
trayer is near.”

¹⁴·⁴³While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the
twelve, arrived. With him was a crowd, armed with
swords and clubs, who was sent from the chief
priests, the scribes and the elders. ⁴⁴The betrayer
had given them a sign, saying, “The one I kiss is the
one. Arrest him, and lead him away under guard.” ⁴⁵Go-
ing directly to Jesus, he said, “Rabbi!” and kissed
him.

¹⁴·⁴⁶They laid hands on him, and arrested him. ⁴⁷One
of the bystanders drew his sword, and struck the high
priestʼs servant, cutting off his ear.

¹⁴·⁴⁸Jesus said to them, “Have you come out with
swords and clubs to arrest me, as you would arrest a
robber? ⁴⁹I was with you every day, teaching in the
temple, and you didnʼt arrest me.”

¹⁴·⁵⁰They all left him, and fled. ⁵¹A young man was
following him, wearing only a linen cloth around his
naked body. They seized him, ⁵²but he left the linen
cloth, and fled naked.

—

¹⁴·⁵³They led Jesus to the high priest. All the chief
priests, the elders and the scribes assembled. ⁵⁴Pe-
ter followed him at a distance, right into the high
priestʼs courtyard. He was sitting with the guards,
and warming himself by the fire.

¹⁴·⁵⁵The chief priests and the whole council sought
testimony against Jesus to put him to death, but
found none. ⁵⁶Many gave false testimony against him,
but their testimony was inconsistent. ⁵⁷Some stood
up, and gave false testimony against him, saying,
⁵⁸“We heard him say, ‘Iʼll destroy this temple made
with hands, and in three days Iʼll build another made
without hands.’” ⁵⁹But even this testimony was incon-
sistent.

¹⁴·⁶⁰The high priest stood up in front of them, and
asked Jesus, “Donʼt you answer? What is it that these
men testify against you?” ⁶¹But he kept silent, and
did not answer. Again the high priest asked him, “Are
you the Christ, the son of the Blessed One?”

¹⁴·⁶²Jesus said, “I am. Youʼll see the son of man sit-
ting at the right hand of power, and coming with the
clouds of heaven.”

¹⁴·⁶³The high priest tore his clothes, and said, “Why
do we need any more witnesses? ⁶⁴Youʼve heard the
blasphemy. Whatʼs your decision?” They all condemned
him as deserving death.

¹⁴·⁶⁵Some began to spit on him, and to cover his face
and strike him, saying, “Prophesy.” The guards re-
ceived him with slaps in the face.

—

¹⁴·⁶⁶While Peter was in the courtyard below, one of
the high priestʼs servant girls came. ⁶⁷Seeing Pe-
ter, she looked at him, and said, “You also were with
Jesus the Nazarene.”

¹⁴·⁶⁸But he denied it, saying, “I donʼt know or un-
derstand what youʼre talking about.” He went out to
the entryway, and a rooster crowed.

¹⁴·⁶⁹The servant girl saw him, and began again to
tell the bystanders, “This man is one of them.”

¹⁴·⁷⁰But again he denied it. After a little while the
bystanders again said to Peter, “Youʼre certainly one
of them, since youʼre a Galilean too.” ⁷¹But he be-
gan to curse and swear, “I donʼt know this man youʼre
talking about.”

¹⁴·⁷²Immediately a rooster crowed a second time. Pe-
ter remembered when Jesus said to him, “Before a
rooster crows twice, youʼll deny me three times”. He
began to weep.

—

¹⁵·¹Early in the morning, the chief priests, elders,
scribes, and the whole council held a consultation.
They bound Jesus, led him away, and delivered him to
Pilate.

¹⁵·²Pilate asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?”
He answered, “You have said so.”

¹⁵·³The chief priests accused him of many things.
⁴Pilate again asked him, “Donʼt you answer? Look how
many charges they bring against you.” ⁵But Jesus
answered no further, so Pilate was amazed.

¹⁵·⁶Now at the feast he used to release for them any
one prisoner whom they requested. ⁷The man named
Barabbas was in prison with rebels who had committed
murder during the insurrection. ⁸The crowd began to
ask Pilate to do for them as he usually did.

¹⁵·⁹Pilate answered them, saying, “Do you want me to
release the king of the Jews for you?” ¹⁰For he knew
that the chief priests had handed him over because of
envy. ¹¹But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to
have him release Barabbas instead. ¹²Pilate again
asked them, “Then what should I do with the one you
call the king of the Jews?”

¹⁵·¹³They shouted back, “Crucify him!”

¹⁵·¹⁴Pilate asked them, “Why? What evil has he done?”
But they shouted all the more, “Crucify him!”

¹⁵·¹⁵Wishing to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released
Barabbas for them. After having Jesus flogged, he
handed him over to be crucified.

—

¹⁵·²¹Simon of Cyrene was passing by, coming from the
country. They forced him to carry Jesusʼs cross.
²²They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha,
which means place of a skull. ²³They offered him wine
mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.

¹⁵·²⁴They crucified him, and divided his clothes a-
mong themselves, casting lots to decide what each
should take. ²⁵It was nine in the morning when they
crucified him. ²⁶The inscription of the charge a-
gainst him read, “The King of the Jews.” ²⁷They cru-
cified two robbers with him, one on his right and one
on his left.

¹⁵·²⁹Those who passed by derided him, shaking their
heads, and saying, “Ha! You who would destroy the tem-
ple and rebuild it in three days, ³⁰save yourself,
and come down from the cross.”

¹⁵·³¹In the same way, the chief priests and the
scribes mocked him to one another saying, “He saved
others. He canʼt save himself. ³²Let this Christ, the
King of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that
we may see and believe.” Those who were crucified
with him also insulted him.

—

¹⁵·³³At noon, darkness fell over the whole land un-
til three in the afternoon. ³⁴At three in the after-
noon Jesus cried with a loud voice, “My God, my God,
why have you abandoned me?”

¹⁵·³⁷Jesus let out a loud cry, and breathed his last.
³⁸The curtain of the temple was torn in two, from the
top to the bottom.

¹⁵·³⁹When the centurion who stood facing him saw the
way he breathed his last, he said, “Truly this man
was the son of God.”

¹⁵·⁴⁰There were also women watching from a distance.
Among them were Mary Magdalene, Salome, and Mary the
mother of James the younger and of Joses. ⁴¹When he
was in Galilee, they followed him and took care of
him. Many other women had come up with him to Jerusa-
lem.

—

¹⁵·⁴²When evening had come, because it was the day be-
fore the Sabbath, ⁴³Joseph of Arimathea came, a prom-
inent member of the council, who was himself waiting
for Godʼs kingdom. He boldly went to Pilate, and
asked for Jesusʼs body. ⁴⁴Pilate was surprised that
he was already dead. ⁴⁵He granted the body to Jo-
seph.

¹⁵·⁴⁶Joseph bought a linen cloth, took him down,
wrapped him in the linen cloth, laid him in a tomb
cut out of a rock, and rolled a stone against the en-
trance of the tomb. ⁴⁷Mary Magdalene and Mary the
mother of Joses were watching to see where he was
laid.

—

¹⁶·¹When the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene,
Salome, and Mary the mother of James bought spices,
so that they could go and anoint him. ²Very early on
the first day of the week, when the sun had risen,
they went to the tomb. ³They were saying to one an-
other, “Who will roll away the stone from the en-
trance of the tomb for us?” ⁴Looking up, they saw
that the stone had already been rolled away, al-
though it was extremely large.

¹⁶·⁵Entering the tomb, they saw a young man sitting
at the right, wearing a white robe, and they were
alarmed. ⁶He told them, “Donʼt be alarmed. Youʼre
looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified. He
has risen. Heʼs not here. See, here is the place
where they laid him. ⁷But go, tell his disciples and
Peter, ‘Heʼs going ahead of you to Galilee. Youʼll
see him there, just as he told you.’”

¹⁶·⁸They went out, and fled from the tomb, for trem-
bling and astonishment had seized them. They said
nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
