                       Digests


# Priorities

    You have reason and conscience to govern your
    choices. The following priorities are a guide
    to keep conscience within proper bounds. They
     are listed by decreasing importance. Try to
     observe all the priorities. If two must con-
        flict, prefer the more important one.

¹Compulsion may only be used when necessary to stop
an immediate threat to life, property, or free will.
²Choose what you will have at the expense of what you
wonʼt. ³Give no importance to that which has none.
⁴Tend to your own affairs.

⁵Make promises sparingly. ⁶Keep your word. ⁷Make a-
mends. ⁸Be grateful.

⁹Take care of yourself. ¹⁰Be sparing and cautious
with behaviors that might be addictive.

¹¹Respect others. ¹²Speak kindly and quietly. ¹³Main-
tain a few strong relationships. ¹⁴Maintain stable,
long-term relationships with your spouses. ¹⁵Obtain
consent from your spouses for all intimate rela-
tions. ¹⁶Have children with your spouses.

¹⁷Spend some time each day quiet and alone. ¹⁸Pray
daily. ¹⁹Study the Digests and Messages daily, bal-
ancing literal and figurative interpretation.

²⁰Avoid contention. ²¹Forgive wrongs, real and
perceived. ²²Maintain political neutrality.

²³Acquire useful knowledge, then act on it. ²⁴Engage
skillfully in an occupation, trade, or craft. ²⁵Make
an honest profit. ²⁶Incur debts rarely and sparing-
ly, and pay them back quickly. ²⁷Ten percent of your
annual expenditures should be donations. ²⁸Keep a mod-
est reserve of useful assets.

²⁹Smile. ³⁰Serve anonymously, without remuneration.

³¹Maintain your body in strength, speed, flexibili-
ty, and balance. ³²Devote one day in seven to
rejuvenation and spiritual growth. ³³Improve your sur-
roundings.

# Virtues

     Every virtue taken to extreme becomes vice.
     The virtues below are listed in pairs. Bal-
    ance the two virtues in a pair. If youʼre un-
     sure how to balance them, err on the side of
    the first. The pairs are listed alphabetical-
     ly with no relative importance intended be-
                     tween them.

¹Challenge, comfort. ²Companionship, solitude. ³Con-
tentment, ambition. ⁴Detachment, attachment. ⁵Flexi-
ble, tenacious. ⁶Generous, frugal. ⁷Gradual, swift.
⁸Holistic, atomistic. ⁹Humble, confident. ¹⁰Independ-
ence, conformity. ¹¹Intellect, emotion. ¹²Mercy, jus-
tice. ¹³Open, guarded. ¹⁴Prepare, improvise. ¹⁵Si-
lence, communication. ¹⁶Simple, abundant. ¹⁷Solemni-
ty, humor. ¹⁸Stable, dynamic. ¹⁹Tactful, honest.
²⁰Tradition, innovation. ²¹Tranquility, excitement.
²²Work, repose.

# Prayer

¹·¹Offer informal prayer at least three times during
your waking hours.

¹·²Position yourself however is meaningful, comforta-
ble, and appropriate to your circumstances. ³Pray si-
lently or aloud. ⁴Begin by saying, “God in heaven.”
⁵In your own words, express gratitude, acknowledge
your faults, and request guidance and assistance.
⁶Pause to listen.

¹·⁷Conclude by saying, “Amen.”

—

²·¹Offer formal prayer once or twice during your wak-
ing hours, ²with at least one performed outside.

²·³When praying outside, consider turning your back
towards the approximate location of the sun. ⁴Pray a-
loud if possible. ⁵Make your best effort to perform
each posture of prayer in turn:

²·⁶Gratitude: Stand, face upward, eyes closed, hands
clasped, until tranquil. ⁷Recite, “God in heaven, I
thank you for life, air to breathe, quiet places, and
the ability to choose; ⁸for challenges, work, emo-
tion, and the gift of reason.” ⁹In your own words, ex-
press heartfelt gratitude to God.

²·¹⁰Confession: Bow, face downward, eyes closed,
hands on knees. ¹¹Recite, “God in heaven, I strive to
keep the Priorities, to balance the Virtues, and to
learn from my failures when I donʼt. ¹²I want to be
more faithful. ¹³I fall short in these ways.” ¹⁴In
your own words, confess to God your failures,
weaknesses, and ways you need to improve.

²·¹⁵Petition: Squat, face forward, eyes closed, arms
outstretched, hands cupped to form a bowl. ¹⁶Recite,
“God in heaven, you have given me a beautiful world
to live in, messengers to teach me, and guidance when
I ask. ¹⁷Hear my prayer.” ¹⁸In your own words, re-
quest Godʼs guidance.

²·¹⁹Reception: Stand, face downward, eyes closed,
hands clasped. ²⁰Recite, “God in heaven, you let the
sun rise on good and evil people alike. ²¹You send
guidance through a gentle thought, a soft feeling, or
a quiet voice. ²²Iʼm listening.” Listen for Godʼs
guidance.

²·²³Action: Bow, face downward, eyes closed, hands on
knees. ²⁴Recite, “God in heaven, the greatest gift
brings no profit when left unused. ²⁵I thank you for
giving me guidance. ²⁶I plan to act.” ²⁷In your own
words, tell God how you will act on the guidance you
have received.

²·²⁸Conclude by saying, “Amen.”

# Parables

¹·¹A young child asks his mother, “How is a baby
made?” ²Knowing the childʼs rudimentary understand-
ing, she responds, ³“The father places a seed in the
motherʼs belly, and it grows into a baby.”

—

²·¹A king had two vaults filled with treasure, each
protected by its own lock. ²The king said that whoev-
er opened a vault could have the treasure inside.
³Two men sought the treasure.

²·⁴The first man turned the dials of the lock. ⁵He
listened carefully as the mechanism moved inside. ⁶He
noticed patterns of sound and vibration within the
dials. ⁷After many days of persistence and study, he
discovered the combination and unlocked the vault.

²·⁸The second man offered to be the kingʼs servant.
⁹He listened carefully to the kingʼs wishes, and exe-
cuted them faithfully. ¹⁰He noticed patterns among
the kingʼs requests and anticipated his wishes. ¹¹Af-
ter many days of persistence and service, the second
man asked the king for the combination and received
it.

²·¹³Both men received treasure.

—

³·¹There were two lakes. ²The first lake said to him-
self, “I will retain every drop of water that flows
into me so that I can be great.” ³His waters became
salty and putrid. ⁴His fish died and the plants a-
long his shore wilted. ⁵Animals and travelers avoided
him.

³·⁶The second lake said to himself, “I want to pros-
per all life on the mountain below me. I will retain
a modest pool for myself then allow each drop to pass
down the river to those who might use it.” ⁷His
waters became clean and sweet. ⁸His fish grew large
and the plants along his shore prospered. ⁹Animals
and travelers came from afar to enjoy his splendor.

—

⁴·¹Rain, freshly fallen from a cloud, is clean and
good to drink. ²As it flows down mountains and a-
cross plains, it becomes soiled and bitter. ³The sun
must extract pure water from the sea again, leaving
impurities behind, to produce fresh rain once more.

—

⁵·¹A horse, a dolphin, and an eagle each needs dif-
ferent nourishment, ²and yet each grows to full stat-
ure and majesty.

—

⁶·¹A child asks his mother, “Please get me a cup from
the top shelf.” ²The mother reaches the cup for him.
³A grown man asks his mother, “Please get me a cup
from the top shelf.” ⁴She responds, “You can reach it
yourself.”

—

⁷·¹A man mixed one measure of sugar and the juice
from one lemon into 2,000 measures of water, ²then
served it to his guests as lemonade.

—

⁸·¹A man brought eggs home from the market. ²Upon ar-
riving, he announced, “I purchased one dozen eggs.”
³His wife said, “No you didnʼt. You bought twelve
eggs.” ⁴A son said, “Youʼre both wrong. There are
clearly three rows of four eggs each.” ⁵A daughter
disagreed, “Not at all. There are four columns of
three eggs each.”

—

⁹·¹A man decided to climb a mountain. ²He fixed his
gaze permanently on the summit and began hiking. ³He
tripped over unseen rocks at his feet, ⁴and was una-
ble to reach the mountain top.

⁹·⁵Another man decided to climb the same mountain.
⁶He gazed permanently at his feet, to avoid the
errors of the first man, and began hiking. ⁷Without
tripping once, he wandered off into a valley, ⁸and
was unable to reach the mountain top.

—

¹⁰·¹A man noticed jigsaw puzzle pieces resting on a
table. ²He wanted to assemble the puzzle but pieces
were missing, and he didnʼt know how the puzzle
should look when finished.

¹⁰·³From time to time he located missing pieces, but
there were still too few to guess how the puzzle
should look. ⁴One day he found a sketch of the fin-
ished puzzle. ⁵He assembled the pieces he had, only
to realize that he was still missing some. ⁶He con-
tinued searching for missing pieces, placing them
where they belonged. ⁷In time, he found all the
pieces, and assembled the puzzle into its beautiful,
complete form.
