                        David

     A selection of proverbs taken from the Book
     of Psalms in the Hebrew Bible. Verse refer-
    ences such as ¹²·⁸ indicate the original
     source of the text, but donʼt imply a full
                      quotation.


²·¹¹Serve GOD with fear and rejoice with trembling.

⁴·⁴In your anger, do not sin. Ponder in your heart on
your bed and be still. ⁵Offer the sacrifices of right-
eousness and put your trust in GOD.

¹²·⁸The wicked walk on every side when vileness is ex-
alted among the children of men.

¹⁵·¹GOD, who may sojourn in your tent? Who may dwell
on your holy hill? ²He who walks with integrity and
does what is right and speaks truth in his heart;
³who does not slander with his tongue and does no
evil to his neighbor and does not take up a reproach
against his friend; ⁴who despises a vile person but
honors those who fear GOD; who keeps a promise even
when it hurts and does not change; ⁵who does not loan
out his money with interest and does not take a bribe
against the innocent. He who does these things shall
never be moved.

¹⁸·²⁵GOD shows mercy to the merciful.

¹⁸·³⁰The word of GOD proves true. He is a shield to
all who take refuge in him.

¹⁹·¹The heavens declare the glory of God and the
skies show his handiwork.

¹⁹·⁷The law of GOD is perfect, reviving the soul. The
testimony of GOD is trustworthy, making wise the sim-
ple. ⁸The precepts of GOD are right, rejoicing the
heart. The commandment of GOD is pure, enlightening
the eyes. ⁹The fear of GOD is clean, enduring forev-
er. The laws of GOD are true and righteous altogeth-
er.

²⁷·¹⁴Wait for GOD. Be strong and let your heart take
courage. Wait for GOD.

³⁰·⁵Weeping may last for a night, but joy comes in
the morning.

³²·¹⁰Many sorrows come to the wicked, but loving-
kindness surrounds him who trusts in GOD.

³³·⁶By the word of GOD the heavens were made and all
their host by the breath of his mouth.

³⁴·¹³Keep your tongue from evil and your lips from
speaking deceit. ¹⁴Depart from evil and do good. Seek
peace and pursue it.

³⁷·¹Donʼt worry about evildoers, and donʼt envy
wrongdoers. ⁷Be still before GOD and wait patiently
for him. Donʼt worry about him who prospers or about
him who carries out wicked schemes. ⁸Cease from an-
ger and forsake wrath. Donʼt worry: it only leads to
evildoing.

³⁷·¹⁶A little that the righteous has is better than
the abundance of many wicked.

³⁷·²¹The wicked borrows and does not pay back, but
the righteous is generous and gives.

³⁹·¹I will guard my ways so that I may not sin with
my tongue. I will muzzle my mouth while the wicked
are in my presence.

⁴¹·¹Blessed is he who considers the poor. GOD will de-
liver him in the day of trouble.

⁴⁶·¹God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. ¹⁰Be still and know that I am God.

⁴⁹·¹⁶Do not be afraid when one is made rich, when the
splendor of his house increases. ¹⁷For when he dies
he will carry nothing away. His glory will not de-
scend after him.

⁵⁰·¹⁴Offer to God a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and
pay your vows to the Most High, ¹⁵and call on me in
the day of trouble. I will deliver you and you will
glorify me.

⁵⁵·²²Cast your burden on GOD and he will sustain you.
He will never allow the righteous to be moved.

⁸²·³Defend the poor and fatherless. Do justice to the
afflicted and destitute. ⁴Res+cue the poor and needy.
Deliver them from the hand of the wicked.

⁹²·¹²The righteous will flourish like the palm tree.
He will grow like a cedar in Lebanon.

⁹⁶·²Sing to GOD, bless his name. Proclaim his salva-
tion from day to day. ³De+clare his glory among the
nations, his marvellous deeds among all the peoples.

¹⁰⁰·¹Make a joyful noise to GOD, all the earth.
²Serve GOD with gladness. Come before him with sing-
ing.

¹⁰²·¹⁷GOD regards the prayer of the destitute and
does not

# despise their prayer.

¹⁰³·⁸GOD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger,
abounding in loving-kindness.

¹⁰⁵·¹Give thanks to GOD. Call on his name. Make known
his deeds among the peoples. ²Sing to him. Sing
praises to him. Talk about all his marvelous deeds.
³Glory in his holy name. Let the hearts of those who
seek GOD rejoice. ⁴Seek GOD and his strength. Seek
his face continually. ⁵Remember the wonders that he
has done, his miracles and the judgments he has pro-
nounced.

¹⁰⁶·¹Praise GOD. Give thanks to GOD, for he is good;
for his loving-kindness endures forever.

¹¹¹·¹⁰The fear of GOD is the beginning of wisdom.
Those who

# obey his commandments have good understanding.

¹¹²·¹Blessed is the man who fears GOD, who delights
greatly in his commandments. ⁴For the upright, light
arises in the darkness. He is gracious, merciful and
righteous. ⁵It is well with the man who deals gener-
ously and lends, who conducts his affairs with jus-
tice.

¹¹⁸·⁸It is better to take refuge in GOD than to put
confidence in man. ⁹It is better to take refuge in
GOD than to put confidence in princes.

¹²²·⁶Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

¹²⁷·¹Except GOD build the house, they labor in vain
who build it. Except GOD keep the city, the watchman
stays awake in vain. ²It is vain for you to rise up
early, to stay up late, to eat the bread of toil—for
he gives sleep to his beloved.

¹²⁷·³Children are a heritage from GOD and the fruit
of the womb is a reward.

¹³³·¹How good and pleasant it is for brothers to live
together in unity.

¹⁴⁶·³Do not put your trust in princes or in the son
of man, who cannot save.

